Master Circular on Protection of Policyholders' Interests,
2024
inlai
Date: 5 th September, 2024
ljPage
71:'1·, ~ --,,; r r

~~
~1f~,t1 ~ ~Ptt11¥1cfi ~ ffl ~
Aza I Ka INSURANCE REGULATORY AND
Amrit Mahotsav ir.iai DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY OF INDIA
IRDAI/PP&GR/CIR/MISC/117 /9/
5th September, 2024
To
All Life Insurers, General Insurers, Health Insurers and Distribution Channels
Sub: Master Circular on Protection of Interests of Policyholders
Background
Insurance sector has embarked upon the journey to achieve the vision of 'Insurance for All' by
Various regulatory reforms have been undertaken in this direction by taking up measures
to protect interests of policyholders, prioritizing ease of doing business, encouraging innovation,
competition, strengthen governance framework to foster growth and self-reliance in the
insurance sector. The interests of policyholder have been at the core of all the initiatives
undertaken which emphasize insurers and distribution channels to fulfill their obligations
towards policyholders, including effective grievance redressal mechanisms and governance
structures centered around policyholder welfare. Regulations on these aspects have been
reviewed comprehensively and the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India
(Protection of Policyholders' Interests, Operations and allied Matters of insurers) Regulations,
2024 (hereinafter called "Regulations") was notified on 22 nd March, 2024. This is second of the
two Master Circulars issued under these Regulations. The first Master Circular may be accessed
at https://irdai.gov.in/ document-detail?documentld=5083599.
Provisions relating to Protection of Interests of Policyholders are being covered in this circular.
The master circular contains two sections as under:
2.1. Section 1: It contains summary of important and relevant information at various stages of
an insurance contract for the prospects / policyholders / customers. A prospect or
policyholder to know his/ her rights and obligations at various stages of an insurance policy
may visit this Section. Important and relevant information at various stages of
Life Insurance Policies are in Part A,
Health Insurance Policies are in Part B,
Retail General Insurance Policies are In Part C.
Separate Master Circulars on certain relevant and important aspects of insurance business
are also issued on Life Insurance Business; Health Insurance Business and General Insurance
Business.
rt-;:r. 115/1, ~~. '1l•Ffi{ll-11i51, ~ - 500 032 , 'qffif
()) : +91-40-20204000 ~ : http://www.irdai.gov.in

~ 2 1Page
Survey No. 115/1, Financial District, Nanakramguda, Hyderabad-500 032 , India
6) : +91-40-20204000 Website: http://www.irdai.gov.in
2.2. Section 2: It contains broad requirements to be complied with by an insurer under the
Regulations.
This master circular is issued under section 34 of the Insurance Act, 1938, section 14 of the
IRDA Act, 1999 and Regulation 56 of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of
India (Protection of Policyholders' Interests, Operations and allied Matters of insurers)
Regulations, 2024 and shall be reviewed every year unless review or repeal is warranted earlier.
The Returns referred under this circular shall be submitted as per the provisions herein and the
Master Circular on Submission of Returns.
All words and explanations used herein and not defined in this Master Circular but defined in the
Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938) or Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999
(41 of 1999) or Rules or Regulations made thereunder shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in those Acts or Rules or Regulations.
In Order to remove any doubts or difficulties that may arise in the application or interpretation
or any of the provisions of this Master Circular, the Competent Authority may issue appropriate
clarifications, as and when deemed necessary.
This has approval of the Competent Authority.

3 [Pane ~
INDEX
s. Chapter Particulars Page No.
No.
Section 1
1 Part A Important and relevant information at various stages of Life 5
Insurance Policies.
2 Part B Important and relevant information at various stages of Health 21
Insurance Policies.
3 Part C Important and relevant information at various stages of Retail 37
General Insurance Policies.
Section 2
4 Chapter I Citizen's Charter 50
5 Chapter II Activities prior to sale of insurance policies 51
6 Chapter Ill Proposal for sale of insurance policies 54
7 Chapter IV Issuance of insurance policies 56
8 Chapter-V Servicing of policyholders and settlements of claims 58
9 Chapter VI Portability of Health Insurance Policies 58
10 Chapter VII Compliance with Judicial /Quasi-Judicial Awards etc. 60
11 Chapter VIII Other Services Related Aspects 61
12 Chapter IX Repeal of Circulars and Guidelines 62 ·
13 Schedule A Citizens' Charter for Life, General and Health Insurers 65
14 Schedule B Form and manner of policy documents and Benefits 72
Illustration
15 Schedule C Contents of Insurance Policies 94
16 Schedule D Customer Information Sheet (CIS) 100

4JPage
Section I - Information for Prospects/Policyholders/Customers

An insurance contract is a contract between the insurer and the policyholder which is effected through a
policy document. Under an insurance contract, the insurer accepts insurance risk from the polic--yholder by
agreeing to compensate the policyholder, as per the terms and conditions of the policy docume 11 t, against
happening of uncertain future insured event(s) affecting the policyholder. The insured events m iay include
the risk of death, disability, sickness, damage to or loss of property, vehicle etc.,

An insurance company (also called "insurer") issues a policy document (also called "policy" or "policy
contract" or "insurance contract") by accepting an amount called "premium" from the prospects to issue an
insurance contract. Insurance claims arising out of insurance contracts are paid by the insurer to the
policyholder or beneficiary, subject to the terms and conditions of the policies.
The following sections are aimed at providing relevant information that the prospect/policyholder should
know before and after buying an insurance policy:

Sr.
No.
1

(a} Part A: covers various stages of Life Insurance Policies.
(b) Part B: covers various stages of Health Insurance Policies.
(c} Part C: covers various stages of Retail General Insurance Policies.
Particulars
Part A : Life Insurance Policies
Prior to Sale
Life insurers are required to make suitable products/riders available to provide wider
choice to the policyholders/prospects catering to:
i. the needs of the customers suitably;
ii. all ages;
iii. all regions, all occupational categories, persons with disabilities and any other
categories;
iv. the policyholders/prospects as per their affordability;
Note: The above does not imply that the insurer shall have one product to cater to all
of the above.
Insurers shall allow flexibility to customers to choose products/riders as per his/her
needs.
SjParre ~
3

Purchase of Life insurance policy
i. Life Insurance products are offered only by Life insurers registered with ilRDAI. A
prospect can buy such products from a life insurer directly or through any of the
distribution channels.
ii. Such purchase can be made either by visiting the office of an Insurer/ distribution
channel or online by visiting the website of the insurer /distribution channel.
iii. "Distribution channel" for purchasing insurance products, includes individual agents,
corporate agents, insurance brokers, web aggregators, insurance marketing firms,
Common Service Centres, etc. Authorized distribution channels to sell insurance
products may be verified from the respective websites of insurance companies whose
products are offered for sale.
iv. In case of availing insurance cover for loans like housing or any other kind of loans,
the prospect may note as under:
a. it is not compulsory to purchase insurance policy through the financial
institution giving loan. He/ She is free to buy insurance policy from any insurer
or through any distribution channel through any mode.
b. he/she may check whether the features /options of the insurance policy like
type of policy; tenure of policy; periodicity of premium payment etc., are
matching with the type of loan being taken.
Advertisements
i. Insurance companies and distribution channels may advertise the insurance
products offered for sale. Such advertisements could be in the form of television
advertisements, radio announcements, social media circulations, newspaper
advertisements, pamphlets or leaflets etc. Generally, the information available in
such advertisements are indicative and may not provide complete details of the
product.
ii. Insurance advertisements carry the registered name of the insurers and unique
identification number (UIN) of the insurance products, wherever insurance product
is advertised.
iii. Before purchasing any insurance product, the prospect should read the prospectus
of the product along with the customized benefit illustrations shared by the
insurer/distribution channels. The prospect may also verify the details of the
product from the website of the insurer.
6jPage
4

5

II

1

Prospectus
i. In order to explain the features, benefits, exclusions, and various other details
offered in insurance products, insurers are required to have prospectus for each of
the product offered by them for sale. They are uploaded on their website.
ii. To understand specific details of any insurance product/s, a prospect may read the
prospectus available on the insurer's website or may ask the representative of the
insurer or distribution channel to provide the same.
Suitability for life insurance:
i. Assessment of suitability for life insurance shall be carried out in respect of savings
related life insurance products and annuity products except those annuities
purchased from proceeds of NPS and from employer offered superannuation fund.
Insurer/distribution channel who source insurance policy obtain details like need for
buying insurance, income of the prospect and affordability, various needs to be met
by insurance policy, expected benefits, type of benefits needed etc., duly confirmed
by the Prospect and the concerned sales person involved in solicitation. Based on the
information obtained from the prospect, the insurer or distribution channel, as the
case may be, shall recommend a suitable product(s) meeting the needs of the
prospect. Such need analysis shall be documented and copy of the same is provided
to the prospect and copies of such need analysis shall be part of the policy document.
ii. A prospect can benefit from recommendations of the insurer/distribution channel /
sales person to decide on a suitable insurance product. However, he/she is also free
to choose any other insurance product/s, if he/she desires so.
At proposal stage
Benefit Illustration (Bl)
While prospectus provides an overall general information about the insurance product,
customized benefit illustration provides specific benefits that would become payable on
occurrence of various events covered in the policy based on the customer specific details
like age, premium amount, premium paying term, policy term etc.
a. In addition to the prospectus of the relevant insurance product, every life insurer/
distribution channel/ authorized sales person must provide customized benefit
illustration to proposer/ prospective policyholder, at the point of sale.
b. Customized benefit illustration is a document which gives details of the benefits that a
prospective policyholder may get on various events covered in the policy throughout the
71Page
2

3

term of the policy, taking into account details like age of the prospect, proposed policy
term, premium, premium paying term of the policy etc.
c. The prospective policyholder should examine the benefit illustration and on being satisfied
that the benefits offered under the product meet his/ her needs, he/ she should sign the
benefit illustration. It shall also be signed by the authorized sales person.
d. Customized Benefit illustration format is as specified at Schedule B. After it is signed by
the prospective policyholder and the authorized sales person, it shall be part of t he policy
document.
Splitting of Policies
i. Insurance policies with respect to an insurance product, can be taken for desired sum
assured as a single policy or can be split into multiple policies with varied sum assured
as per the needs of the prospect. However, if multiple policies of the same nature are
sold to a prospect at the same time, it will be deemed as splitting of policies. Splitting
of policies shall be done only at the option and specific request of the prospect after
recording his/her consent.
ii. In case the prospect is planning to take more than one policy of the same product, the
prospect should examine the possible discounts that the insurer generally offers on
premiums and sum assured. Insurance policies may provide discounts on premium in
case of higher sum assured or higher premium amounts. If such policies are split into
more than one policy, the policyholder may not be able to get such premium or sum
assured based discounts offered by the insurer. Further, in case of Unit Linked
Insurance policies, splitting of policies may result in deduction of higher amount of
charges, as some charges may be levied on per policy basis.
iii. In case of splitting of policies, unless there is a specific request from the Prospect, such
action shall not result into any additional cost to the policyholder by way of increase
(directly or indirectly) in fees or charges or the commission in whatsoever name either
at the inception of the policy or at any time during the term of the policy.
Proposal Form
i. For purchasing a life insurance policy, the life insurer will require a proposal form to be
submitted by the prospect.
ii. Proposal form will be made available in Hindi or English. However, if sought by the
prospect, it will also be provided in regional language.
iii. A prospect, while buying an insurance policy, is required to provide the information/
details sought in the proposal form, including the following:
a. mobile no, email id, present and permanent address;
81 Pagc
4

b. bank account details;
c. name of the nominee and his/her mobile no, email id, present, permanent
address, relationship of the nominee, details of authorized person for minor
nominees and details of bank accounts of the nominee;
iv. Certain products may require the prospect to undergo medical examination as per the
information given by the insurer and need to provide health and other medical details,
if asked in the proposal form. Also, insurer may ask for details of occupation, income
details along with proof of income to ascertain the premium paying capacity and other
requirements before issuance of the policy. If asked for, such details need to be
provided by the prospect.
v. For the purpose of underwriting and KYC, insurers would require prospects to submit
age proof, identity proof and address proof. KYC process may be on line or off line.
vi. In case, the prospect is not familiar with the language printed in the proposal form,
insurer or the distribution channel shall explain the details sought in the proposal form.
In such case, a declaration shall be obtained from the prospect that the details have
been explained to him/her.
vii. A policyholder or prospect, who is a person with disability, may duly authorize a
representative to give declaration on his/her behalf, if required.
viii. Prospects should exercise due care and provide required information in the proposal
form which forms the basis of issuance of an insurance policy. True and complete
information in the proposal form enables insurers to assess the risks appropriately and
to decide on the proposal form. This also facilitates hassle-free claim servicing by the
insurer. Hence, the information should be given responsibly.
ix. In case of buying immediate annuity product from the proceeds of the National Pension
System (NPS), the "Exit Form" provided to the NPS will be considered as the proposal
form.
x. In case, there is a change in any of the information already provided in the proposal
form like mobile number, email IDs, residential address, bank account details,
nominee details during the term of the policy, policyholder should update such
information with the insurer, to enable the insurer to provide efficient policy servicing.
xi. Proposer before signing the proposal form in case of group insurance should ensure
that all the details as required therein have been provided.
Payment of premium / premium deposit:
i. Premium is required to be paid only after the insurer communicates the decision of
acceptance of the proposal.
ii. Risk Cover shall commence only after receipt of premium.
9jPage
5

6

iii. No premium deposit/ proposal deposit is required to be paid to the insurer along
with the proposal form except in case of policies issued basis declaratioli1i of good
health where risk cover commences immediately on receipt of premiurn. There
should not be scope for either short or excess collection of premium.
iv. Insurers shall ensure that explicit consent is obtained from the
prospect/policyholder for deduction of amount towards premium payment from
bank account.
Nomination
i. While filling the proposal form, prospect is required to provide the detail s of the
nominee.
ii. Nomination is mandatory to facilitate payment of claim amount in case of death of
life assured.
iii. Policyholder may nominate one or more persons and specify the percentage of claim
amount payable to each nominee.
iv. Where any nominee is a minor, it shall be lawful for the policyholder to appoint any
person in the manner laid down by the insurer, to receive the money secured by the
policy in the event of his/her death during the minority of the nominee.
v. Nomination can be changed at any time during the term of the policy.
Processing of proposal forms (Underwriting of the proposal):
i. On receipt of the proposal form, the insurer shall process the proposal with speed and
efficiency. In case of requirement of further details/clarifications on details given in the
proposal form, the same should be called for in one-go and not on piecemeal basis
within 7 days from the date of receipt of the proposal form.
ii. In such case, the prospect should provide such information at the earliest so that the
decision on the proposal form can be taken with speed and efficiency.
iii. The insurer shall take decision on the proposal form within 7 days of receipt of
information at para 6 (i) or 6 (ii) as applicable. On acceptance of the proposal form, the
insurer shall:
a) promptly communicate its decision to the prospect along with the premium
payable.
b) provide coverage from the date of receipt of premium.
iv. In case of non-acceptance of proposal, insurer shall inform the prospect its decision
within 7 days along the reasons for non-acceptance.
v. After the acceptance of a proposal, the prospect will be referred to as the "policyholder
or life assured or insured". The person whose risk of loss of life is covered is called 'life
lOIPage
7

8.
Ill
1
assured' or 'insured'. The person in whose name insurance policy is issued is called
"policyholder.
vi. A policyholder or a life assured can be same or different.
Issuance of the insurance policy
Insurer, on acceptance of the proposal and upon receipt of the premium, issues the
insurance policy in electronic form. Choice of the prospect/policyholder/customer for
availing physical policy document shall be mandatorily sought in the proposal form.
All policies issued in electronic form by the insurer directly to the policyholder shall also be
issued in physical form, if requested by the policyholder.
Policies issued in electronic form shall be digitally signed by the insurer.
Insurers shall, within 15 days of acceptance of a proposal, furnish the following to the
prospect without any additional charge:
i. Covering letter for the policy document informing the free look period,
ii. Policy document,
iii. Copy of the proposal form submitted by the prospect,
iv. Copy of Benefit Illustration,
v. Customer Information Sheet,
vi. Copy of Need Analysis document under Suitability Assessment, if any,
vii. Any other document as may be required by the specific product.
At the time of receipt of policy document
Customer Information Sheet (CIS)
CIS is a statement provided by the insurer along with the policy document that provides
in simple words, important information and basic features of the policy issued at one
place.
CIS is to be provided with every policy in the format as given in Schedule D for Life
insurance policy. The CIS shall
i. be provided to every policyholder in case of both Individual Insurance policy holder
as well as a Member of a Group Insurance Policy.
ii. have details like
a) type of insurance,
b) sum assured,
c) benefits,
d) summary of exclusions which policy does not cover,
11 I P age
2

e) certain important details such as Free Look Period, Policy Rene\lVal date,
options like revival of policy, policy loan and any other options.
iii. contain information regarding the Claims Procedure, Policy Servicing and Grievance
Redressal Mechanism including contact details of Insurance Ombuds man of
appropriate jurisdiction.
Acknowledgment in physical or digital will have to be obtained from the Polic yholder.
On request, CIS will be made available in regional language.
While CIS provides in simple words basic and important features of a policy, the
policyholder may refer the policy document for complete details about the policy
issued.
Where the policyholder finds any inconsistency in the coverage or scope of the policy,
the same may be taken up with the insurer either directly or through the distribution
channel engaged in procuring the policy for suitable rectification.
Free Look Period:
i. From the date of receipt of the life insurance policy having policy term of one year
or more, a policyholder will have 30 days called as "Free Look period" for reviewing
the terms and conditions of the policy.
ii. In case the policyholder is satisfied with policy terms or conditions, he/she has the
option to return the policy within this 30 days period to the insurer for cancellation.
iii. Irrespective of the reasons mentioned, insurer must accept the request of the
policyholder to exercise the option of free look cancellation.
iv. The policyholder shall be entitled to a refund of the premium paid subject only to a
deduction of a proportionate risk premium for the period of cover and the expenses,
if any, incurred by the insurer on medical examination of the proposer and stamp
duty charges.
v. In respect of a linked insurance product, subject to deductions mentioned under
para (iv) above, the insurer shall refund the proceeds by repurchase of the units at
the Net Asset Value (NAV) of the units on the date of cancellation.
vi. The applicable refund of premium upon free look cancellation shall be refunded
within 7 days of receipt of request for free look cancellation. In case of any delay
in refund, the insurer shall:
a) refund such amounts along with interest at the bank rate plus 2 percent on
the refundable amount, from the date of receipt of the request for free look
12IPage
3
IV
1
2
cancellation till the date of refund. This penal interest is without prejudice
to any other penalty that may be levied by the Authority for non-compliance.
b) Such interest shall be paid suo-moto by the insurer.
Lapse and revival of the insurance policy
Where the insured do not make the payment of premium within the grace period, the
policy will lapse. Policy lapse is a situation where insured can no longer avail the
benefits and coverage provided under a policy.
A lapsed policy can be revived during the period specified in the policy document. For
revival of the policy, the policyholder have to pay the unpaid premiums, along with
interest or a late fee, and may be required to submit a health declaration or undergo a
medical examination, depending on the terms and conditions of the policy.
Digilocker
The policyholder has an option to store the soft copy of the policy document in Digilocker.
During the currency of the policy
Payment of premium
i. Insurance policy will remain in-force and continue to offer the coverage as indicated
in the policy as long as the policyholder pays the premium as specified in the policy.
ii. To avail the benefits of an insurance policy, the policyholder must pay premium on
or before due date throughout the premium payment term subject to the grace
period, as applicable.
iii. Premium shall be paid only to the account of the insurer. It can be paid either
directly to the insurer or through its authorized distribution channel.
iv. Insurer/authorized distribution channel shall issue valid premium
acknowledgement immediately.
Grace Period for payment of premium:
i. Grace Period is the additional time given for payment of premium after the due
date, without any penalty or late fee. It is available in other than single premium
policies.
ii. Grace period from the due date of premium is:
o Fifteen days where premium is paid in monthly instalments; and
o Thirty days where premium is paid in quarterly/half-yearly/annual
instalments.
13IPage
3 4 5 6 V 1

iii. During the grace period, the policy is considered to be in-force and the r isk cover
continues without any interruption as per the terms and conditions of the policy.
Service request
a. During the term of the policy, Policyholders can change the details already provided
to the insurer such as address, contact details, nominee details, etc. W hen such
requests are received from the policyholder, Insurers shall acknowledge the same
immediately and update the changes requested for within 7 days.
b. Where the requests have not been attended to, a grievance can be registered as
detailed in para VI (1).
Loans under life insurance policies:
In case of life insurance policies, except in pure risk policies and linked insurance policies,
a policyholder can take repayable policy loan, during the currency of the policy, as per the
terms and conditions specified in the policy document, in order to meet financial
exigencies/needs, if any.
Partial withdrawals under linked life insurance policies:
i. In case of linked life insurance policies, in the initial period of five years of the term
of the policy called the lock-in-period, the policyholder is not allowed to withdraw any
amount.
ii. After the lock-in period, policyholder may make partial withdrawals from the unit fund
as per the terms specified in the policy, to meet financial exigencies, if any.
Policy cannot be contested:
No policy of life insurance shall be contestable on any ground whatsoever after the expiry
of three years from the date of the policy i.e. from the date of issuance of the policy or the
date of commencement of risk or the date of revival of the policy or the date of the rider
to the policy, whichever is later.
No claim shall be repudiated by the insurer without obtaining legally tenable evidence to
substantiate such repudiation.
At the time of claim
On happening of the insured event as specified in the policy document
14jPage
2

i. Policyholder or the claimant, as applicable, is required to intimate the insurer, about
the happening of the insured event resulting into a claim under the insurance IJOlicy, at
the earliest possible time either in person or through:
a) Online mode;
b) distribution channel;
c) authorized call centre of the insurer;
d) any other mode as may be specified in the policy document.
ii. No claim shall be rejected or closed for want of documents or for delayed intimation of
claim.
Processing of claim and Turn Around Time (TAn for settlement of claims
Claim intimation received by the insurers shall be processed and settled within
timelines specified as under:
s.
No.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Particulars Times lines for settlement of
claims
Death claim, except in cases Within 15 days from the date of
warranting investigation intimation of claim.
Death claim warranting Within 45 days from the date of
investigation intimation of claim.
Surrender, partial withdrawal Within 7 days of receipt of request.
Maturity Benefits, Survival On due date.
benefits, Annuity payouts,
Income benefits etc.
In case the claim is not settled within the specified timelines, then the claimant is
entitled for interest at bank rate plus 2 percent from the date of receipt of intimation
till the date of payment. Such interest shall be paid by the insurers suo-moto along
with the claim amount.
Documents to be submitted for making a claim:
i. Claim form and other documents such as death certificate, annual survival
certificate (for annuity policies), First Information Report (in case of claim due to
15IPage
accident), Post Mortem Report (in case of claim due to accident), D ischarge
summary (in case of death at the hospital), as applicable.
ii. Insurers shall
a) state the documents required for processing of the claim in t l'l e policy
document; and
b) display the same on their websites.
In case of death of the policyholder, where the policy is assigned, the nominee should
check
a) whether there is a valid assignment made in favour of the financial institution.
b) the outstanding balance on the loan and give consent to the insurer to pay to
the financial institution only the outstanding dues on loan.
c) that the balance, if any, from the death benefit is paid to the nominee's bank
account directly.
Surrender of life insurance policies:
i. It is advisable to keep a life insurance policy in-force without surrendering the same to
avail the benefits under the policy. Surrender of a life insurance policy involves
payment of surrender penalty. In case a policyholder chooses to surrender an insurance
policy in case of financial exigencies, on payment of surrender value, the insurance
policy will terminate.
ii. All individual non-linked savings and protection oriented products such as non-linked
life insurance products and non-linked pension products including deferred annuity
products, other than pure risk products and immediate annuity products shall acquire
surrender value
iii. In case of surrender of policy in the first year, higher of the Guaranteed Surrender Value
(GSV) or "Special Surrender Value" (SSV) becomes payable after completion of first
policy year provided one full year premium is paid by the policyholders.
iv. In case of policies with limited premium payment term of less than five years and single
premium, higher of GSV or SSV shall be payable immediately after receipt of first full
year premium or single premium.
v. For linked insurance policies, unit fund value less the surrender charge will be paid on
surrender subject to lock in of five years.
16IPage
Group Insurance Policies
There are two types of group insurance policies viz Employer-Employees and Non-
Employer-Employees policies.
In case a group insurance policy is issued to an employer-employee group:
i. the employer shall be treated as the group master policyholder and the
employees shall be treated as the members of the group.
ii. the employer shall share the group insurance policy to all the members of the
group in confirmation of insurance protection of each individual memb•er.
iii. except for group fund-based products, in all other cases, claims shall be paid
directly to the employee or the beneficiary as the case may be.
In case a group insurance policy is issued to a non-employer-employee group:
i. the individual group member shall be the insured member and the holder of the
policy shall be the master policyholder.
ii. the insurer shall issue a certificate of insurance giving details of group policies
viz., schedule of benefits, period of cover, premium to be paid, terms of the
policy, exclusion etc. to all the members of the group.
iii. The insurer shall ensure that the premium paid by the members of the Group is
remitted directly to them. Hence, individual members should directly pay the
premium to the insurer preferably through electronic transfer. Insurer shall settle
claims directly to the members/beneficiary of the group.
iv. The insurer shall ensure that the claim payment is made:
a) in the name of the insured member or his/her nominee directly through
electronic transfer to the claimant's bank account except for cases referred to
clause (b) below.
b) in the name of the master policyholder, if it is a financial institution, in whose
favour there is a valid assignment, subject to the following conditions being
satisfied:
there is authorized assignment made by the insured member in favor of
the group holder of the policy on the date of event;
such authorized assignment shall only be to the extent of outstanding dues
on loan as per the outstanding loan schedule on the date of occurrence of
the event;
17IPagc
(^8) the balance of the claim (i.e., the difference between the sum assured and
the outstanding loan amount on the date of occurrence of the eve nt) must
be paid directly to the claimant or the insured member;

complete details of the claim amount settled, the remittances wnade to
the holder of the group insurance policy towards outstanding loan balance
and the balance claim amount payable to the member / nominee /
beneficiary shall be communicated by the Insurer directly to the insured
member/ nominee/ beneficiary.
c) The policyholder/ beneficiary/ nominee should be informed in advance about
the existence of the assignment. He/she should give his/her confirrr1ation to
the outstanding loan amount as on the date of occurrence of the event. Consent
for payment of such outstanding loan amount to the master policyholder of the
policy shall also be obtained from the policyholder/beneficiary/nominee.
VI Complaints Mechanism: In case the policyholder or the claimant is required to raise
any complaint against the insurer, distribution channel, authorized entity to collect
premiums, third party administrators (TPA), he/she may use the Grievance redressal
procedure given below:

1 Lodging of complaint
i. Where the policyholder/ beneficiary is not satisfied with the services of the insurer or
the distribution channel, he/ she can lodge the complaints directly with the insurer or
with the distribution channel including TPA or with both using any one of the following
mode:
0 By visiting their nearest branch
0 Through letters or email
0 On insurer's website or
0 by calling at designated call centre of the insurer
ii. The policyholder or the claimant also has the option to register the complaint on-line at
IRDAl's Bima Bharosa by visiting https://bimabharosa.irdai.gov.in /.
iii. Insurers shall integrate its grievance portal with the Bima Bharosa portal to facilitate
the registering/ tracking of grievance on-line by the policyholders. The insurer's system
must be equipped with a real-time mirroring functionality that ensures their grievance
database is consistently synchronized with the Bima Bharosa.
18jPage
2

3
4
Turnaround time for resolution of complaints/ grievance
i. On receipt of a complaint, the complainant will have to be given an acknowledgement
immediately. Insurers should provide resolution to the complaint within 14 days along
with the reasons for not accepting the complaint with specific reference to the
relevant terms and conditions of the policy.
ii. The complainant can track the status of the complaint by logging-in to the Bima
Bharosa or to the insurer's grievance portal or on the call centre of the insurer.
iii. The insurer shall have in place robust technology-based infrastructure for handling
Grievance Redressal which also has functionality to identify unrelated/unidentifiable
complaints sourced by fraudsters.
Filing of complaint before Insurance Ombudsman
(i) In case the complainant is not satisfied with the resolution of grievance provided by
the insurer, they can escalate the unresolved / partially resolved complaints to
Insurance Ombudsman of concerned jurisdiction, in case the claim amount is up to
Rs. 50 lakhs.
(ii) A policyholder has the option to take up the matter before insurance ombudsman of
competent jurisdiction without any charge/ fee in any of the following manner:
a. In person;
b. Online by visiting https://cioins.co.in/Complaint/Online;
c. In writing, by post or by email by giving complete details.
(iii) Details such as name and address of the Insurance Ombudsman of competent
jurisdiction shall be available in the policy document. It shall also be provided in the
resolution letter given by the insurer. It is also available at
https://cioins.co.in/Complaint/Online.
Implementation of Ombudsman Award
i. The Insurer is required to comply with the award of the Insurance Ombudsman
within 30 days of receipt of award.
ii. In case the Insurer does not honour the Insurance Ombudsman award within
30 days, a penalty of Rs. 5000/-per day shall be payable to the complainant
for each day of delay.
iii. Such penalty is in addition to the penal interest liable to be paid by the Insurer
under the Insurance Ombudsman Rules, 2017.
19IPage
iv. This provision will not be applicable in case insurer chooses to appeai I against
the award of the Insurance Ombudsman within 30days. In such case, due
intimation shall be sent to the Policyholder.
VI I Miscellaneous provisions

1 Caution against spurious/fraudulent calls

2
i. Policyholders or the prospects should be aware of spurious phone calls and
fictitious / fraudulent offers through messages or any other means of
communication.
ii. IRDAI or its officials do not involve in any activities of insurance business like
selling insurance policies, announcing bonus or investment of premiums,
refund of amounts. Policyholders or the prospects receiving such phone calls
are requested to lodge a police complaint.
iii. Insurers and Insurance Intermediaries sending commercial communications to
their existing or prospective customers shall fulfil the extant regulatory
requirements prescribed by the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India.
Unclaimed amount
i. Policyholder or the claimants are required to provide his/her correct mobile
number, address, bank details in the proposal form and update such information
as and when it is changed. In the absence of such details, settlement of claims by
the insurers will be delayed, as the policyholder or the claimants can't be reachable
and/or bank account details may not be available for claim settlement. This results
in unclaimed amounts lying with the insurer.
ii. "Unclaimed Amount" is an amount payable to consumers, including income
accrued thereon, remaining unpaid beyond twelve months from the due date of
such payment, on account of their non-contactability.
iii. A claimant/ policyholder can search if there is any unclaimed amount payable to
him / her by any insurer at Bima Bharosa website of IRDAI at
https://bimabharosa.irdai.gov.in/Home/UnclaimedAmount which provides at
one place access to website links of various insurers where unclaimed amounts
held by them are displayed. It can also be verified from the website of the concerned
insurer.
iv. Unclaimed amount belonging to policyholder / claimant can be identified by
matching any two of the following fields:
20 IP age
3

1

o Policy Number
o PAN of the Policyholder
o Name of the Policyholder
o Date of birth of the Policyholder
v. The unclaimed amounts can be claimed from the concerned insurer by 'following
due process as specified by the insurer.
vi. In case the unclaimed amount is not claimed within 10 years, the same is
transferred to Senior Citizens' welfare fund (SCWF) by the insurer.
vii. The claimant/ policyholder can claim the unclaimed amounts up to 25 years from
the date of transfer of the same to the SCWF through the concerned insu rer. If no
claim is made up to a period of 25 years after transfer to the SCWF, such amounts
shall be escheat to the Central Government.
For more information about the life insurance products, surrender value, benefits, charges,
funds, NAV, disclosures, past performance, annual statement, disclosures, top-up premium,
partial withdrawal, discontinuance, reduction in yield etc., please refer to master Circular
no. IRDAI / ACTL / MSTCIR / MISC / 89 / 6 / 2024 dated 12th June, 2024 at
https://irdai.gov.in/document-detail?documentld=5032913 and IRDAI (Insurance
Products) Regulations, 2024 at https://irdai.gov.in/consolidated-gazette-notified-
regulations.
PART B: Health Insurance Policies
Prior to Sale

Insurers are required to make available products/add-ans/riders to provide wider
choice to the policyholders/prospects catering to
a. all ages;
b. all types of existing medical conditions;
c. pre-existing diseases and chronic conditions;
d. all systems of medicine and treatments including Allopathy, AYUSH and other
systems of medicine;
e. every situation of treatment including domiciliary hospitalization, outpatient
treatment (OPD), Day Care and Homecare treatment;
21/Page
f. all regions, all occupational categories, persons with disabilities and any other
categories;
g. all types of Hospitals and Health Care Providers to suit the affordabil ity of the
policyholders/ prospects. Policyholder shall not be denied coverage in case of
emergency situations.
Note: The above does not imply that the Insurer shall have one product to cater to
all of the above.
Insurers shall allow for customization of products by customer by provi ding the
flexibility to choose products / add-ons / riders as per his / her medical cor1ditions /
specific needs.
Products are to be made available in compliance with various laws: Insurers s h all offer
products in accordance with relevant provisions of the following Laws:
a) The Mental Healthcare Act, 2017;
b) The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016;
c) The Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 2021;
d) The Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 , and
e) The HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Control) Act, 2017.
Purchase of insurance policy
i. Insurance products are offered only by insurers registered with IRDAI. A prospect
can buy such products from an insurer directly or through any of the distribution
channels.
ii. Such purchase can be made either by visiting the office of Insurer / distribution
channel or online by visiting the website the insurer /distribution channel.
iii. "Distribution channel" for purchasing the insurance products, includes individual
agents, corporate agents, insurance brokers, web aggregators, insurance
marketing firms, Common Service Centre, etc. Authorized distribution channels to
sell insurance products may be verified from the respective websites of the
insurance companies whose products are offered for sale.
221 P ,1 g e
II
1
Advertisements
i. Insurance companies and the distribution channels may advertise the i11surance
products offered for sale. Such advertisements could be in the form of television
advertisements, radio announcements, social media circulations, newspaper
advertisements, pamphlets or leaf lets etc. Generally, the information available in
such advertisements are indicative and may not provide complete deta,ils of the
product.
ii. Insurance advertisements carry the registered name of the insurers and unique
identification number (UIN) of the insurance products, wherever insurance product
is advertised.
iii. Before purchasing any insurance product, the prospect should read the prospectus
of the product along with the customized benefit illustrations shared by the
insurer/distribution channels. The prospect may also verify the details of the
product from the website of the insurer.
Prospectus
i. In order to explain the features, benefits, exclusions, and various other details
offered in insurance products to customers, insurers are required to have
prospectus tor each of the product offered by them for sale and are uploaded in
their website.
ii. To understand specific details of any insurance productjs, a prospect may read the
prospectus available on the insurers website or may ask the representative of the
insurer or distribution channel to provide the same.
At proposal stage
Proposal Form:
i. For purchasing an insurance policy, insurer will require a proposal form to be
submitted by the prospect.
ii. Proposal form will be made available in Hindi or English. However, if sought by the
prospect, it will also be provided in regional language.
iii. A prospect, while buying an insurance policy, is required to provide the information
/ details sought in the proposal form, including the following:
a. mobile no, email id, present and permanent address;
b. bank account details;
c. name of the nominee and his/her mobile no, email id, present, permanent
address, relationship of the nominee, details of authorized person for minor
nominees and details of bank accounts of the nominee;
23 I P age
2

iv. If asked in the proposal form, prospects are required to provide health and other
medical details.
v. Ayushman Bharat Health Account (ABHA) number is a hassle-free method of
accessing and sharing health records digitally. With specific consenat of the
policyholder, insurers may facilitate creation of
ABHA number as per the procedures laid down. Further, express consent of the
policyholder shall be obtained for sharing of medical records and any other related
information in every instance.
vi. In case, the prospect is not familiar with the language printed in the proposal form,
insurer or the distribution channel shall explain the details sought in the proposal
form. In such case, a declaration shall be obtained from the prospect that the
details have been explained to him/her.
vii. A policyholder or prospect, who is a person with disability, may duly authorize a
representative to give declaration on his/her behalf.
Vlll. Prospects should exercise due care and provide required information in the
proposal form which forms the basis of issuance of an insurance policy. True and
complete information in the proposal form enables insurers to assess the risks
appropriately and to decide on the proposal form. This also facilitates hassle-free
claim servicing by the insurer. Hence, the information should be given responsibly.
ix. In case there is a change in any of the information already provided in the proposal
form like mobile number, email IDs, residential address, bank account details,
nominee details during the term of the policy, policyholder should update such
information with the insurer, to enable the insurer to provide efficient policy
servicing.
x. Proposer before signing the proposal form or enrolment form in case of group
insurance should ensure that all the details as required therein have been provided.
Nomination
i. While filling the proposal form, prospect is required to provide the details of the
nominee.
ii. Nomination is mandatory to facilitate payment of claim amount in the event of death
of policyholder.
iii. Policyholder may nominate one or more person and specify the percentage of claim
amount payable in the event of death of the policyholder.
24 / Page
3

4

5

iv. Where any nominee is a minor, it shall be lawful for the policyholder to app oint any
person in the manner laid down by the insurer, to receive the money secured by the
policy in the event of his/her death during the minority of the nominee.
v. Nomination can be changed at any time during the term of the policy.
Payment of premium/ premium deposit:
i. Premium is required to be paid only after the insurer communicates the decision of
acceptance of the proposal.
ii. Risk Cover shall commence only after receipt of premium.
iii. No premium deposit/ proposal deposit is required to be paid to the insurer along
with the proposal form except in case of policies issued basis declaration of good
health where risk cover commences immediately on receipt of premium. There
should not be scope for either short or excess collection of premium.
iv. Insurers shall ensure that explicit consent is obtained from the
prospectjpolicyholder for deduction of amount towards premium payment from
bank account.
Processing of proposal forms (Underwriting of the proposal)
i. On receipt of the proposal form, the insurer shall process the proposal with speed and
efficiency. In case of requirement of further details/clarifications on details given in the
proposal form, the same should be called for in one-go and not on piecemeal basis
within 7 days from the date of receipt of the proposal form.
ii. In such case, the prospect should provide such information at the earliest so that the
decision on the proposal form can be taken with speed and efficiency.
iii. The insurer shall take decision on the proposal form within 7 days. On acceptance of
the proposal form, the insurer shall:
a) promptly communicate its decision to the prospect along with the premium
payable.
b) provide coverage from the date of receipt of premium.
iv. In case of non-acceptance of proposal, insurer shall inform the prospect its decision
within 7 days along the reasons for non-acceptance.
v. After the acceptance of a proposal, the prospect will be referred to as the "policyholder
or insured". The person whose risks are covered is called 'insured'. The person in whose
name insurance policy is issued is called "policyholder.
Issuance of the insurance policy
25 I Page

6

Ill

1
Insurer, on acceptance of the proposal and upon receipt of the premium, issues the
insurance policy in electronic form. Choice of the prospect/policyholder/customer for
availing physical policy document shall be mandatorily sought in the proposal form.
All policies issued in electronic form by the insurer directly to the policyholder shal I also be
issued in physical form, if requested by the policyholder.
Policies issued in electronic form shall be digitally signed.
Insurers shall, within 15 days of the acceptance of a proposal, furnish the following to the
prospect without any additional charge:
i. Policy document,
ii. Copy of the proposal form submitted by the prospect,
iii. Customer Information Sheet,
iv. Medical Reports, if applicable.
At the time of receipt of policy document
Customer Information Sheet (CIS)
CIS is a statement provided by the insurer along with the policy document that provides
in simple words, important information and basic features of the policy issued at one
place.
CIS is to be provided with every policy in the format as given in Schedule D for Health
insurance. It is a document provided by the Insurer along with the policy document that
explains in simple words, the basic features of a policy at one place. The CIS shall:
a. be provided to every policyholder in case of both Individual Insurance policy holder
as well as a Member of Group Insurance Policy.
b. have details like
i. type of insurance,
ii. sum Insured,
iii. coverage provided,
iv. summary of exclusions which policy does not cover,
v. sub-limits (a pre-defined limit above which insurer will not pay),
vi. deductibles (specified amount upto which an insurer will not pay any
claim/which will be deducted from total claim, if the claim amount is more
than the specified amount), co-payment,
vii. waiting period(s) (time period during which specified diseases / treatments
are not covered), and
261 Page
2

3.
IV
1
viii. certain important things such as Free Look Period, Policy Renewal, IVI igration,
Portability and Moratorium Period.
c. contain information regarding the Claims Procedure, Policy Serviciing and
Grievance Redressal Mechanism including contact details of lrasurance
Ombudsman of appropriate jurisdiction.
Acknowledgment in physical or digital will have to be obtained from the Policyholder.
On request, CIS will be made available in regional language.
While CIS provides in simple words basic and important features of a policy, the
policyholder may refer the policy document for complete details about the policy
issued.
Where the policyholder finds any inconsistency in the coverage or scope of the policy,
the same may be taken up with the insurer either directly or through the distribution
channel engaged for procuring the policy for suitable rectification.
Free Look Period:
i. A period of 30 days, from the date of receipt of the policy document is available to
the policyholder to review the terms and conditions of the policy. If he/she is not
satisfied with any of the terms and conditions, he/she has the option to cancel
his/her policy. This option is available in case of policies with a term of one year or
more.
ii. Irrespective of the reasons mentioned, insurer must accept the request of the
policyholder to exercise the option of free look period. The policyholder shall be
entitled to a refund of the premium paid subject only to a deduction of a
proportionate risk premium for the period of cover and the expenses, if any incurred
by the insurer on medical examination of the proposer and stamp duty charges.
Digilocker
The policyholder has an option to store the soft copy of the policy document in Digilocker.
During the currency of the policy
Payment of premium
i. Insurance policy will remain in-force and continue to offer the coverage as indicated
in the policy, as long as the policyholder pays the premium as specified in the policy.
ii. To avail the benefits of an insurance policy, the policyholder must pay premium on
or before due date throughout the premium payment term subject to the grace
period as applicable.
271 Page
2
3
4

iii. Premium shall be paid only to the account of the insurer. It can be pai d either
directly to the insurer or through its authorized distribution channel.
iv. Insurer/authorized distribution channel shall issue valid premium
acknowledgement immediately.
Grace Period for payment of premium:
i. "Grace period" is the additional time given for payment of premium after the due
date, without any penalty or late fee. It is available in other than single premium
policies. However, coverage will be available during the period of grace based on
policy terms and conditions.
ii. Grace period from the due date of premium is:
a. Fifteen days where premium is paid in monthly instalments; and
b. Thirty days where premium is paid in quarterly / half-yearly / annual
instalments.
iii. If the premium is paid in instalments during the policy period, coverage will be
available for the grace period also.
iv. If the policy is renewed during grace period, all the credits (sum insured, No Claim
Bonus, Specific Waiting periods, waiting periods for pre-existing diseases,
Moratorium period etc.) accrued under the policy shall be protected. The same is
applicable for both Indemnity and Benefit products.
Service request
i. During the term of the policy, Policyholders are allowed to change the details
already provided to the insurer such as address, contact details, nominee details,
etc. When such requests are received from the policyholder, Insurers shall
acknowledge the same immediately and update the changes requested for within
7 days.
ii. Where the requests have not been attended to, a grievance can be registered as
detailed in para VI (1).
Cancellation of indemnity based health insurance policy by the policyholder:
The policyholder may cancel his/her policy at any time during the term, by giving 7 days'
notice in writing. The Insurer shall:
a) refund proportionate premium for unexpired policy period, if the term of policy upto
one year and there is no claim (s) made during the policy period.
~ 281 Page

5

6

7

8
b) refund premium for the unexpired policy period, in respect of policies with term
more than 1 year and risk coverage for such policy years has not commenced.
In case of any delay in refund, the insurer shall refund such amounts along with interest at
the bank rate plus 2 percent on the refundable amount, from the date of receipt of the
request for free look cancellation till the date of refund. Such interest shall be paid suo-
moto by the insurer.
Renewal of Health Insurance Policy:
i. A health insurance policy is renewable provided the product is not withdrawn, except
in case of established fraud or non-disclosure or misrepresentation by the Insured.
If the product is withdrawn, the policyholder shall be provided with suitable options
to migrate to another product.
ii. An Insurer shall not deny the renewal on the ground that the policyholder had made
a claim (s) in the preceding policy years.
iii. An Insurer shall not resort to fresh underwriting unless there is an increase in sum
insured. In case increase in sum insured is requested by the policyholder, the Insurer
may underwrite only to the extent of increased sum insured.
Migration in case of Indemnity policies:
In case of migration of one policy to another with the same Insurer, the policyholder
(including all members under family cover and group insurance policies) can transfer the
credits gained to the extent of the Sum Insured, No Claim Bonus, Specific Waiting periods,
waiting period for pre-existing diseases, Moratorium period etc. in the previous policy to the
migrated policy.
No Claim Bonus:
The Insurer may reward the policyholders who do not make claim in the form of No Claim
Bonus (NCB). Such NCB shall be paid as per the choice/ express consent of the policyholder
in the following forms at the time of every renewal:
a. Cumulative Bonus: Addition in the Sum Insured without an associated increase in
premium; and/or
b. Discount in renewal Premium.
Policy/Claim cannot be contested
29 [ Page
V

1
2

No policy and claim of health insurance shall be contestable on any grounds of non-
disclosure and/or misrepresentation except for established fraud, after the completion of
the Moratorium Period, i.e. 60 months of continuous coverage
Note :The accrued credits gained under the ported and migrated policies shall be counted
for the purpose of calculating the Moratorium period.
At the time of claim
On happening of the contingency (ies) / claim
i. Policyholder or the claimant, as applicable, is required to intimate the insurer, about
the happening of a claim under the insurance policy, at the earliest possible time
either in person or thr~>Ugh:
a) Online mode;
b) distribution channel;
c) Third Party Administrator (TPA);
d) Hospital /Health care Provider where such facility is provided;
e) authorized call centre of the insurer;
f) any other mode as may be specified in the policy document.
ii. No claim shall be rejected or closed for want of documents or for delayed intimation
of claim.
Processing of claim
i. Claim intimation received by the insurers shall be processed and settled within
timelines specified. For time line for settlement of the claims of health, please refer
para 3.
ii. In case the claim is not settled within the specified timelines, then the claimant is
entitled for interest at bank rate plus 2 percent from the date of receipt of intimation
to till the date of payment. Such interest shall be suo-moto paid by the insurers.
3 Claim settlement under health Insurance policies

3 (i) Cashless facility for health insurance

1.. Approval for Cashless facility:
i. Insurer shall decide on the request for cashless authorization immediately but
not more than one hour of receipt of request.
30 I Page

ii. Insurers may arrange for dedicated Help Desks in physical mode at the
hospital to deal and assist with the cashless requests.
iii. Insurers shall also provide pre-authorization to the policyholder through Digital
mode.
Final authorization for Discharge from the hospital
i. Insurer shall grant final authorization within three hours of the receipt of
discharge authorization request from the hospital. In no case, the polic yholder
shall be made to wait to be discharged from the Hospital.
ii. If there is any delay beyond three hours, the additional amount if any charged
by the hospital shall be borne by the insurer from shareholder's fund.
3{ii) In the event of the death of the policyholder during the treatment, the insurer shall:

i. immediately process the request for claim settlement.
ii. get the mortal remains (dead body) released from the hospital immediately.
3(iii) Settlement of health insurance Claims

1.. TPAs are registered with the Authority, and may be engaged by insurers to provide
services related to health insurance policies on behalf of insurers, in particular, at the
time of claim.
Insurer shall ensure that the claims registered are attended to at speed and the
claims are settled at the earliest possible time.
Pursuant to intimation of the claim, Insurers and Third-Party Administrators (TPAs),
shall collect the required documents from the Hospitals. Policyholder shall not be
required to submit the documents.
No claim shall be repudiated without the approval of Product Management
Committee (PMC) or a three-member sub-group of PMC called the Claims Review
Committee (CRC).
In case, the claim is repudiated or rejected or disallowed partially, details shall be
communicated to the claimant along with full details giving reference to the specific
terms and conditions of the policy document.
Settlement of claims (other than cashless) shall be settled within fifteen days from
submission of claim.
311 Page
4 Group Insurance Policies

There are two types of group insurance policies viz. Employer-Employees a rnd Non-
Employer-Employees policies.
In case a group insurance policy is issued to an employer-employee group:
i. the employer shall be treated as the group master policyholder and the
employees shall be treated as the members of the group.
ii. the employer shall share the group insurance policy to all the members of the
group in confirmation of insurance protection of each individual member.
iii. claims shall be paid directly to the employee or the beneficiary as the case may
be.
iv. In order to provide cashless claim settlement for health insurance from the date
of commencement of cover, the Insurer shall obtain the details of members of
the group from the master policyholder, at the earliest. No claim shall be denied
for non-availability of details of members of the group.
In case a group insurance policy is issued to a non-employer-employee group:
i. the individual group member shall be the insured member and the holder of the
policy shall be the master policyholder.
ii. the insurer shall issue a certificate of insurance giving details of group policies
viz., schedule of benefits, period of cover, premium to be paid, terms of the
policy, exclusion etc. to the members of the group.
Claims shall be paid directly to the employee or the beneficiary as the case may be.
5 Claims in respect of multiple Policies held by policyholders:
Indemnity Policies:
a) If a policyholder has more than one health insurance policy from different
insurers he/she can file for claim settlement as per his/her choice under
any policy.
b) The Insurer of that chosen policy shall be treated as the primary Insurer.
c) In case the available coverage under the said policy is less than the
admissible claim amount, the primary Insurer shall seek the details of
other available policies of the policyholder, his/her choice of the other
insurer(s) and shall coordinate with other Insurers to ensure settlement of
JY
321 Page
VI

1

2

the balance amount as per the policy conditions, without causjng any
hassles to the policyholder.
Benefit based Policies:
On occurrence of the insured event the policyholder, can claim from all I nsurers
under all policies.
Complaints Mechanism: In case the policyholder or the claimant is required t o raise
any complaint against the insurer, distribution channel, authorized entity to collect
premium, third party administrators, he/she may use the Grievance redressal
procedure given below:
Lodging of complaint
i. Where the policyholder/ beneficiary is not satisfied with the services of the insurer or
the distribution channel, he/ she can lodge complaints directly with the insurer or with
the distribution channel including TPA or with both using any one of the following mode:
o By visiting their nearest branch;
o Through letters or email;
o On insurer's website; or
o by calling at their designated call centre of the insurer.
The policyholder or the claimant also has the option to register the complaint on-line at
IRDAl's Bima Bharosa by visiting https://bimabharosa.irdai.gov.in/.
Insurers shall integrate its grievance portal with the Bima Bharosa portal to facilitate the
registering/ tracking of grievance on-line by the policyholders. The insurer's system must
be equipped with a real-time mirroring functionality that ensures their grievance database
is consistently synchronized with the Bima Bharosa.
Turnaround time for resolution of complaints/ grievance
i. On receipt of a complaint, the complainant will have to be given an acknowledgement
immediately. Insurers should provide resolution to the complaint within 14 days along
with the reasons for not accepting the complaint with specific reference to the
relevant terms and conditions of the policy.
331 Page
3

4

ii. The complainant can track the status of a complaint by logging-in to the Bima
Bharosa or to the insurer's grievance portal or on the call centre of the insurer.
iii. The insurer shall have in place robust technology-based infrastructure f o r handling
Grievance Redressal which also has functionality to identify unrelated/ uni<ientifiable
complaints sourced by fraudsters.
Filing of complaint before Insurance Ombudsman
i. In case the complainant is not satisfied with the resolution of grievance p .rovided by
the insurer, they can escalate the unresolved / partially resolved complaints to
Insurance Ombudsman of concerned jurisdiction, in case the claim amount i s up to Rs.
50 lakhs.
ii. The policyholder has option to take up the matter before insurance ombudsman of
competent jurisdiction without any charge/ fee through any of the following options:
a. In person;
b. Online by visiting https:j / cioins.co.in/Complaint/Online;
c. In writing through post or through email by giving complete details.
iii. Details such as name and address of the Insurance Ombudsman of competent
jurisdiction shall be available in the policy document. It shall also be provided in the
resolution letter given by the insurer. It is also available at
https://cioins.co.in/ Complai nt/Online.
Implementation of Ombudsman Award
i. The Insurer is required to comply with the award of the Insurance Ombudsman
within 30 days of receipt of award.
ii. In case the Insurer does not honour the Insurance Ombudsman award within
30 days, a penalty of Rs. 5000/-per day shall be payable to the complainant
for each day of delay.
iii. Such penalty is in addition to the penal interest liable to be paid by the Insurer
under the Insurance Ombudsman Rules, 201.7.
iv. This provision will not be applicable in case insurer chooses to appeal against
the award of the Insurance Ombudsman within 30days. In such case, due
intimation shall be sent to the Policyholder.
341 Page
VII

1
2

Miscellaneous provisions

Caution against spurious/fraudulent calls
i. Policyholders or the prospects should be aware of spurious phone calls and
fictitious / fraudulent offers through messages or any other means of
communications.
ii. IRDAI or its officials do not involve in any activities of insurance business like
selling insurance policies, announcing bonus or investment of premiums,
refund of amounts. Policyholders or the prospects receiving such phone calls
are requested to lodge a police complaint.
iii. Insurers and Insurance Intermediaries sending commercial communications to
their existing or prospective customers shall fulfil the extant regulatory
requirements prescribed by the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India.
Unclaimed amount
Policyholder or the claimants are required to provide his/her correct mobile
number, address, bank details in the proposal form and update such information
as and when it is changed. In the absence of such details, settlement of claims by
the insurers will be delayed, as the policyholder or the claimants can't be reachable
and/or bank account details may not be available for claim settlement. This results
in unclaimed amounts lying with the insurer.
"Unclaimed Amount" is an amount payable to consumers, including income
accrued thereon, remaining unpaid beyond twelve months from the due date of
such payment, on account of their non-contactability.
A claimant/ policyholder can search if there is any unclaimed amount payable to
him / her by any insurer at Bima Bharosa website of IRDAI at
https://bimabharosa.irdai.gov.in/ Home/UnclaimedAmount which provides at
one place access to website links of various insurers where unclaimed amounts
held by them are displayed. It can also be verified from the website of the concerned
insurer.
Unclaimed amount belonging to policyholder / claimant can be identified by
matching any two of the following fields:
o Policy Number
o PAN of the Policyholder
o Name of the Policyholder
o Date of birth of the policyholder
35 IP age
3

The unclaimed amounts can be claimed from the concerned insurer by following
the due process as specified by the insurer.
In case the unclaimed amount is not claimed within 10 years, the same is
transferred to Senior Citizens' welfare fund (SCWF).
The claimant/ policyholder can claim the unclaimed amounts up to 25 y ears from
the date of transfer of the same to the SCWF through the concerned insurer. If no
claim is made up to a period of 25 years after transfer to the SCWF, such amounts
shall be escheat to the Central Government.
Portability in case of Health Indemnity Policies
i. Portability means a facility provided to the health insurance polic yholders
(including all members under family cover), to transfer the credits gai ned from
one insurer to another insurer.
ii. By porting, the policyholder is entitled to transfer the credits gained to the
extent of the Sum Insured, No Claim Bonus, specific waiting periods, waiting
period for pre-existing disease, Moratorium period etc. from the Existing Insurer
to the Acquiring Insurer in the previous policy.
iii. The Acquiring and the Existing Insurers shall jointly, ensure that the entire
underwriting details and claim history of the Policyholders are seamlessly
transferred.
iv. The existing insurer shall provide the information sought by the Acquiring
insurer immediately but not more than 72 hours of receipt of request through
Insurance Information Bureau of India (IIB) https://iib.gov .in/ portal.
v. The Acquiring insurer shall decide and communicate on the proposal at the
earliest possible time but not more than 5 days of receipt of information from
Existing insurer.
vi. A policyholder desirous of porting his/her policy to another insurer shall apply to
such insurer to port the entire policy along with all the members of the family, if
any, at least 30 days before, but not earlier than 60 days from the due date for
renewal. Insurers are free to consider proposal for portability even if the
policyholder has approached within 15 days from the renewal date of the existing
policy, but in all such cases acquiring insurer shall ensure that there is no break in
policy.
vii. No charges shall be levied on the policyholder for porting-in or porting-out.
Jv 361 Page
4
1

3

To know more details as regards health insurance business, please refer IRDAl's
Master circular no. IRDAI/HLT/CIR/PR0/84/5/ 2024 dated 29.05.:2024 at
https://irdai.gov.in /document-detail?documentld=4942918 and IRDAI (l 111 surance
Products) Regulations, 2024 at https://irdai. gov.in/consolidated-gazette-notified-
regulations.
Part C: For Retail General Insurance Policies

This section is applicable in case of retail products ie., an insurance product designed
for individuals or households as also for micro or small businesses.
Prior to Sale

Insurers are required to make available products/ add-ons:
i. to provide wider choice to the retail policyholders/ prospects covering his/
her assets, risks, properties, liabilities against various perils, exposures and
lines of business.
ii. for individuals, farmers, MSME and other retail segments.
iii. that are easy to understand and in simple language.
iv. which are less than one year, annual and more than one year as per the
needs and choice of the customer.
v. which covers different risks of the customer/ policyholder by way of
package products.
vi. which can be customized to meet the needs of different regions;
geographies; segments.
Insurers shall allow for customization of products by providing flexibility to choose
products/ add-ons as per his/her specific needs. The insurer shall offer different
products for different risks or perils depending upon customer requirements.
Insurers shall strive to create innovative products which are beneficial to the
customer.
Base Product - Every Insurer shall have a retail product which is identified and
designated as base product defining the necessary minimum coverage in each Line of
Business. The same will be displayed on its website allowing customers to compare
with its variants or alternatives.
Insurers are required to specify the following under Retail General Insurance products~
371 Page
i. Scope of coverage (perils or contingencies insured) - whether coverage is on named
perils basis (covers the policyholder only for the risks named in the policy) or all-risk
basis (covers all causes of loss except those specifically excluded) or any o t her basis.
ii. Exclusions and limitations - what are the exclusions and limitations that w ill impact
the coverage under the policy.
iii. Warranties & conditions - what are the warranties & conditions w hose non-
compliance in the context of circumstances of a loss can make the clai m void or
voidable. Conditions and Warranties applied on retail products will be s i mple and
precise.
iv. Application of condition of average/ underinsurance - whether the loss will be subject
to underinsurance and how much percentage of underinsurance is waived.
Underinsurance is the amount of loss that will be borne by the policyholder in a
situation when the sum insured declared in the policy is less than the actual value of
the asset.
v. Salvage - the amount that is assessed which the damaged asset will fetch in the
open market. This amount is deducted from the claim amount.
vi. Deductible or excess -what is the deductible or excess (the amount of loss that will
be borne by the policyholder) under the policy, which will reduce the amount of the
claim.
vii. Basis of settlement of loss - The following basis on which amount will be arrived, at
namely:-
a. Indemnity (after application of depreciation, condition of average/
underinsurance, salvage, deductible, etc.);
b. Reinstatement value (indemnity amount without application of depreciation /
underinsurance);
c. Agreed value (stated amount in policy without adjustment or average);
d. First loss (cover for an amount below the full value of the items insured);
e. Parametric basis (on specified loss occurrence, the stated limit of liability shall
be settled without evaluation or measurement of the actual extent or amount of
loss or damage incurred).
Purchase of insurance policy
i. Insurance products are offered only by insurers registered with IRDAI. A prospect
can buy such products from an insurer directly or through any of the distribution
channel.
ii. Such purchase can be made either by visiting the office of an Insurer/ distribution
channel or on line by visiting the website of the insurer /distribution channel.
38 I P age
6.
II

iii. "Distribution channel" tor purchasing the insurance products, includes individual
agents, corporate agents, insurance brokers, web aggregators, insurance
marketing firms, Common Service Centre etc. Authorised distribution channels to
sell insurance products may be verified from the respective websites of the
insurance companies whose products are ottered for sale.
Advertisements
i. Insurance companies and the distribution channels may advertise the insurance
products offered for sale. Such advertisements could be in the form of television
advertisements, radio announcements, social media circulations, newspaper
advertisements, pamphlets or leaf lets etc. Generally, the information available in
such advertisements are indicative and may not provide complete details of the
product.
ii. Insurance advertisements carry the registered name of the insurers and unique
identification number (UIN) of the insurance products, wherever insurance product
is advertised.
iii. Before purchasing any insurance product, the prospect should read the prospectus
of the product along with the customized benefit illustrations shared by the
insurer/distribution channels. The prospect may also verify the details from the
website of the insurer.
Prospectus
i. In order to explain the features, benefits, exclusions, and various other details
offered in insurance products to customers, insurers are required to have
prospectus tor each of the product ottered by them tor sale. They are uploaded in
their website.
ii. To understand specific details of any insurance product/s, a prospect may read the
prospectus available on the insurers website or may ask the representative of the
insurer or distribution channel to provide the same.
At proposal stage

Proposal Form:
i. For purchasing an insurance policy, insurer will require a proposal form to be
submitted by the prospect.
ii. Proposal form will be made available in Hindi or English. However, if sought by the
prospect, it will also be provided in regional language.
39 I p 3 g C
2

iii. A prospect, while buying an insurance policy, is required to provide the iraformation
/ details sought in the proposal form, including the following:
a) mobile no, email id, present and permanent address;
b) bank account details;
c) name of the nominee and his/her mobile no, email id, present, permanent
address, relationship of the nominee, details of authorized person for minor
nominees and details of bank account of the nominee.
iv. In case, the prospect is not familiar with the language printed in the proposal form,
insurer or the distribution channel shall explain the details sought in the proposal
form. In such case, a declaration shall be obtained from the prospect that the
details have been explained to him/her.
v. A policyholder or prospect, who is a person with disability, may duly authorize a
representative to give declaration on his/her behalf.
v1. Prospects should exercise due care and provide required information in the
proposal form which forms the basis of issuance of an insurance policy. True and
complete information in the proposal form enables insurers to assess the risks
appropriately and to decide on the proposal form. This also facilitates hassle-free
claim servicing by the insurer. Hence, the information should be given responsibly.
vii. In case there is a change in any of the information already provided in the proposal
form like mobile number, email IDs, residential address, bank account details,
nominee details during the term of the policy, policyholder should update such
information with the insurer, to enable the insurer to provide efficient policy
servicing.
Nomination
i. While filling the proposal form, prospect is required to provide the details of the
nominee.
ii. Nomination is mandatory to facilitate payment of claim amount in the event of
death of policyholder.
iii. Policyholder may nominate one or more person and specify the percentage of
claim amount payable in the event of death of the policyholder.
iv. Where any nominee is a minor, it shall be lawful for the policyholder to appoint
any person in the manner laid down by the insurer, to receive the money
secured by the policy in the event of his/her death during the minority of the
nominee.
v. Nomination can be changed at any time during the term of the policy.
40 IP age
3

5

6

Processing of proposal forms (Underwriting of the proposal)
i. On receipt of the proposal form, the insurer shall process the proposal with speed and
efficiency. In case of requirement of further details/clarifications on details g/iven in the
proposal form, the same should be called for in one-go and not on piecemeal basis
within 7 days from the date of receipt of the proposal form.
ii. In such case, the prospect should provide such information at the earliest so that the
decision on the proposal form can be taken with speed and efficiency.
iii. The insurer shall take decision on the proposal form within 7 days. On acceptance of
the proposal form, the insurer shall:
a) promptly communicate its decision to the prospect along with the premium
payable.
b) provide coverage from the date of receipt of premium.
iv. In case of non-acceptance of proposal, insurer shall inform the prospect its decision
within 7 days informing the reasons for non-acceptance.
v. After the acceptance of a proposal, the prospect will be referred to as the "policyholder
or insured".
Insurers shall, within 15 days of the acceptance of a proposal, furnish the following to the
prospect without any additional charge:
i. Policy document,
ii. Copy of the proposal form submitted by the prospect,
iii. Customer Information Sheet.
Issuance of the insurance policy
Insurer, on acceptance of the proposal and upon receipt of the premium, issues the
insurance policy in electronic form. Choice of the prospect/policyholder/customer for
availing physical policy document shall be mandatorily sought in the proposal form.
All policies issued in electronic form by the insurer directly to the policyholder shall also be
issued in physical form, if requested by the policyholder.
Policies issued in electronic form shall be digitally signed.
Motor and Homeowner (Fire) Insurance largely cater to retail customers. Therefore,
following additional options are to be made available to the policyholder/ customer for
motor and home owner (fire) insurance.
411Page
Motor Insurance -
a) Customer may be given the following options as first choice under motor i nsurance:
i) "Pay as you Drive"/ "Pay as you Go" insurance cover.
ii) comprehensive cover that includes coverage for depreciation.
b) Towing/ Road Assistance Service: Every retail customer can avail road side
assistance services offered by the insurer either on cashless or reimbursement basis
as per the product design.
c) Salvage: In case of partial loss, the retail customer will not be burdened with disposal
of salvage. The policyholder shall be paid his/ her claim amount. It shall be the
responsibility of the insurer to collect the salvage from the customer.
d) Add-on cover: Premium where applicable, for each Add-on Cover opted for by the
retail customer, is to be shown separately in the Premium Computation Table.
e) lnsured's Declared Value (IDV): The lnsured's Declared Value (IDV) of the vehicle will
be deemed to be the 'Sum Insured' and it will be fixed at the commencement of each
policy period for each insured vehicle.
The criteria for determining the IDV and any associated scale of value depreciation
shall be approved by the Product management committee (PMC) and published by
the Insurer on their website. The basis of IDV shall form part of CIS. An illustration of
calculation of IDV should also be provided.
f) Depreciation on Non-OEM/ Non-OES parts - The insurer will not apply depreciation
on Non-OEM/ Non-OES parts that are used in repairs of motor vehicle following a
loss.
Homeowner (Fire) Insurance
a) Every retail customer will be covered for "fire" peril under a homeowner (fire) policy
for the building (if owned by the customer) and / or contents and personal
belongings (clothing, personal articles, electrical & electronic gadgets, TV, fridge,
washing machine, air conditioner, air cooler, geyser, etc.), furniture (sofa sets, beds,
diwans, recliners, dining/ study/ computer table, etc.), fixtures (tube-lights, fans,
etc.), fittings (electrical, kitchen, bathroom, etc.).
b) The policyholder/ customer shall have the option in Stand-alone "fire" only
insurance policy to include other perils such as
i) Earthquake;
ii) Cyclone, Storm, Hurricane, etc.;
iii) Flood, Inundation;
iv) Lightning;
v) Landslide, Rockslide, Avalanche;
42 JP age
Ill

1
vi) Explosion of domestic pressure vessels.
Alternatively, he/ she will have the option to exclude one or more above mentioned perils
from the fire insurance policy. For example, the policyholder/ customer can ask insurers
for insurance coverage against earthquake risks in seismic active zones, cycl,one cover
along the coastal areas, flood and inundation along rivers, lakes, water bo<lies, etc.,
landslide, rockslide in hilly areas.
The policyholder/ customer can ask the insurer to include i) burglary/ theft of contents and
personal belongings; ii) electrical damage / non-working of electrical items (microwave,
fridge, air conditioner, air cooler, TV, mixie, washing machine, computer, laptop, mobile
phone, etc.) in the Homeowner (Fire) Insurance.
No warranties shall apply on Homeowners Insurance Product.
At the time of receipt of policy document
Customer Information Sheet (CIS)
CIS is a statement provided by the insurer along with the policy document that provides
in simple words, important information and basic features of the policy issued at one
place.
CIS is to be provided with every policy in the format as given in Schedule D for Retail
General insurance policy. It is a document provided by the Insurer along with the policy
document that explains in simple words, basic features of a policy at one place.
It contains in brief the scope of coverage, add-ons, basis of sum insured, sum insured,
exclusions, deductibles, special conditions & warranties, endorsements, etc.
It shall also contain information regarding the claims procedure, claims intimation and
processing, principle for admissibility of claim, sample claim calculation process for
retail products, policy servicing and grievance redressal mechanism including contact
details of Insurance Ombudsman of appropriate jurisdiction.
Acknowledgment of receipt of CIS will have to be obtained from the Policyholder in
physical or digital form.
On request, CIS will be made available in regional language.
While CIS provides in simple words basic and important features of a policy, the
policyholder may refer the policy document for complete details about the policy
issued.
43 I P age
2.
IV

1.
3

Where the policyholder finds any inconsistency in the coverage or scope of 'the policy,
the same may be taken up with the insurer either directly or through the d istribution
channel engaged for procuring the policy for suitable rectification.
Digilocker
The policyholder has an option to store the soft copy policy document in Digilocker.
During the currency of the policy

Payment of premium
i. Premium shall be paid only to the account of the insurer. It can be paid either
directly to the insurer or through its authorized distribution channel.
ii. Insurer/distribution channel shall issue premium acknowledgement immediately.
Service request
i. During the term of the policy, Policyholders are allowed to change the details
already provided to the insurer such as address, contact details, nominee details,
etc. When such requests are received from the policyholder, Insurers shall
acknowledge the same immediately and update the changes requested for within
7 days.
ii. Where the requests have not been attended to, a grievance can be registered as
detailed in para VI (1).
Cancellation of policies issued under Retail General Insurance business:
i. The retail policyholder can cancel the policy at any time during the term, by
informing the insurer. In case the Policyholder cancels the policy, he/ she is not
required to give reasons for cancellation.
The insurer can cancel the policy only on the grounds of established fraud, by giving
minimum notice of 7 days to the retail policyholder.
ii. Under no circumstances can the insurer cancel statutory Motor Third Party Liability
insurance or any other compulsory insurance mandated by law except in case of
double insurance or total loss.
iii. The insurer shall -
a) refund proportion premium for unexpired policy period, if the term of the policy is
upto one year and there is no claim(s) made during the policy period.
~
441 Page
V

1

2

3

4

b) refund premium for the unexpired policy period, in respect of policy with the term
more than one year and the risk coverage for such policy years has not
commenced.
At the time of claim
On happening of the contingency (ies) / claim
i. Policyholder or the claimant, as applicable, is required to intimate the insu rer, about
the happening of a claim under the insurance policy, at the earliest possible time
either in person or through:
a) Online mode;
b) distribution channel;
c) authorized call centre of the insurer;
d) any other mode as may be specified in the policy document.
ii. No claim shall be rejected or closed for want of documents or for delayed intimation
of claim.
Documentation
i. All the required documents for acceptance of risk shall be called at the time of
underwriting the proposal. No claim shall be rejected for want of documents.
ii. The customer will submit only those documents that are directly related to the claim
such as claim form, Driving License, Permit, Fitness, FIR, Un-traced Report, Fire
Brigade Report, Post Mortem Report, books of accounts, stock register, wage
register, repair bills (only in cases where cashless is not available), wherever
applicable.
Processing of claim
i. Claim intimation received by the insurers shall be processed and settled within
timelines specified. For time line for settlement of the claims of retail general
insurance, please refer para 4.
ii. In case the claim is not settled within the specified timelines, then the claimant is
entitled for interest at bank rate plus 2 percent from the date of receipt of intimation
to till the date of payment. Such interest shall be paid by the insurers suo-moto.
Settlement of Claims under Retail General Insurance Policies
In case of a claim under general insurance policy, loss assessment is made by the
surveyor. Any loss that is reported under a general insurance product that exceeds Rs
45 I P age
VI

1
50,000/-or more (in case of motor insurance) and Rs. 1 Iakh or more (in case of other
than motor insurance) needs to be mandatorily surveyed by a registered sur veyor and
loss assessor.
The allocation of the surveyor should happen within 24 hours of reporting of claim.
On allocation of Surveyor, Insurer shall communicate the details of the appointment
of surveyor, including the role, duties and responsibilities of the surveyor to t h e insured
immediately.
The surveyor shall submit the survey report to the insurer within fifteen days of
allocation. It shall be the duty of the insurer to obtain the survey report within the
specified time limits. In case surveyor delays submission of the survey report beyond
fifteen days, Rs. 500 per day for each day of delay shall be paid to the claimant.
The insurer shall decide on the claim within seven days of receipt of the survey report
or after expiry of fifteen days from allocation of the claim to the surveyor whichever is
earlier. This timeline will not apply in case of policies issued on the property/building
on reinstatement value basis.
The insurer cannot repudiate the claim in full or part:
a) where the breach of warranty or condition is not relevant to nature or
circumstances of loss.
b) on account of any delay on part of the Policyholder, where such delay has not
resulted in the amount of assessed loss being increased.
Multiple policies involving Bank or other lending or financing entity
In case there is more than one insurance policy issued to the customer/ policyholder
covering the same risk, the insurer will not apply contribution clause. Underinsurance will
be applied on an overall basis taking into consideration the sum assured under all policies
and comparing it with the value at risk.
Complaints Mechanism: In case the policyholder or the claimant is required to raise any
complaint against the insurer, distribution channel, entity authorized to collect premiums,
third party administrators, he/she may use the Grievance redressal procedure given below:
Lodging of complaint

46 I Page

2

3
i. Where the policyholder/ beneficiary is not satisfied with the services of the insurer or
the distribution channel, he/ she can lodge the complaints directly with the insurer
or with the distribution channel including TPA or with both using any one of the
following mode:
o By visiting their nearest branch;
o Through letters or email;
o On insurer's website; or
o by calling at their designated call centre of the insurer.
ii. The policyholder or the claimant also has the option to register the complaint on-line
at IRDAl's Bima Bharosa by visiting https://bimabharosa.irdai.gov.in/.
iii. Insurers shall integrate its grievance portal with the Bima Bharosa portal to facilitate
the registering/ tracking of grievance on-line by the policyholders. The insurer's
system must be equipped with a real-time mirroring functionality that ensures their
grievance database is consistently synchronized with the Bima Bharosa.
Turnaround time for resolution of complaints/ grievance
i. On receipt of a complaint, the complainant will have to be given an
acknowledgement immediately. Insurers should provide resolution to the complaint
within 14 days along with the reasons for not accepting the complaint with specific
reference to the relevant terms and conditions of the policy.
ii. The complainant can track the status of the complaint by logging-in to the Bima
Bharosa or to the insurer's grievance portal or on the call centre of the insurer.
iii. The insurer shall have in place robust technology based infrastructure for handling
Grievance Redressal which also has functionality to identify
unrelated/unidentifiable complaints sourced by fraudsters.
Filing of complaint before Insurance Ombudsman
i. In case the complainant is not satisfied with the resolution of grievance provided by the
insurer, they can escalate the unresolved/ partially resolved complaints to Insurance
Ombudsman of concerned jurisdiction, in case the claim amount is up to Rs. 50 lakhs.
ii. The policyholder has an option to take up the matter before insurance ombudsman of
competent jurisdiction without any charge/ fee through any of the following options:
a. In person;
b. Online by visiting https:j /cioins.co.in/Complaint/Online;
471Page
4

c. In writing through post or through email by giving complete details.
iii. Details such as name and address of the Insurance Ombudsman of competent
jurisdiction shall be available in the policy document. It shall also be provi:ded in the
resolution letter given by the insurer. It is also avai I able at
https://cioins.co.in/Complaint/Online.
Implementation of Ombudsman Award
i. The Insurer is required to comply with the award of the Insurance Ombudsman
within 30 days of receipt of award.
ii. In case the Insurer does not honour the Insurance Ombudsman award within
30 days, a penalty of Rs. 5000/-per day shall be payable to the complainant
for each day of delay.
iii. Such penalty is in addition to the penal interest liable to be paid by the Insurer
under the Insurance Ombudsman Rules, 2017.
iv. This provision will not be applicable in case insurer chooses to appeal against
the award of the Insurance Ombudsman within 30 days. In such case, due
intimation shall be sent to the Policyholder
VI I Miscellaneous provisions

1 Caution against spurious/fraudulent calls

2
i. Policyholders or the prospects should be aware of spurious phone calls and
fictitious / fraudulent offers through messages or any other means of
communications.
ii. IRDAI or its officials do not involve in any activities of insurance business like
selling insurance policies, announcing bonus or investment of premiums,
refund of amounts. Policyholders or the prospects receiving such phone calls
are requested to lodge a police complaint.
iii. Insurers and Insurance Intermediaries sending commercial communications to
their existing or prospective customers shall fulfil the extant regulatory
requirements prescribed by the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India.
Unclaimed amount
i. Policyholder or the claimants are required to provide his/her correct mobile
number, address, bank details in the proposal form and update such information
as and when it is changed. In the absence of such details, settlement of claims by
48 IP age
3

the insurers will be delayed, as the policyholder or the claimants can't be reachable
and/or bank account details may not be available for claim settlement. This results
in unclaimed amounts lying with the insurer.
ii. "Unclaimed Amount" is an amount payable to consumers, includi 111 g income
accrued thereon, remaining unpaid beyond twelve months from the d u e date of
such payment, on account of their non-contactability.
iii. A claimant/ policyholder can search if there is any unclaimed amount p ayable to
him / her by any insurer at Bima Bharosa website of IRDAI at
https://bimabharosa.irdai.gov.in/ Home/UnclaimedAmount which provides at
one place access to website links of various insurers where unclaimed amounts
held by them are displayed. It can also be verified from the website of the concerned
insurer.
iv. Unclaimed amount belonging to policyholder / claimant can be identified by
matching any two of the following fields:
o Policy Number
o PAN of the Policyholder
o Name of the Policyholder
o Date of birth of the Policyholder
v. The unclaimed amounts can be claimed from the concerned insurer by following
the due process as specified by the insurer.
vi. In case the unclaimed amount is not claimed within 10 years, the same is
transferred to Senior Citizens' welfare fund (SCWF).
vii. The claimant/ policyholder can claim the unclaimed amounts up to 25 years from
the date of transfer of the same to the SCWF through the concerned insurer. If no
claim is made up to a period of 25 years after transfer to the SCWF, such amounts
shall be escheat to the Central Government.
To know more about provisions on general insurance business, please refer IRDAl's Master
circular no. IRDAI/ NL / MSTCIR/MISC/90/ 06/ 2024 dated 11.06.2024 at
https://irdai.gov.in / document-detail?documentld=5025428 and IRDAI (Insurance
Products) Regulations, 2024 at https:/ / irdai.gov.in / consolidated-gazette-notified-
regulations.
49 I P age
Section 2
Broad requirements to be complied with by the Insurers
Chapter I
CITIZENS' CHARTER
Citizens' Charter
1.1. To empower customers with information about availability of products, standards of
service, time limits that the consumers can reasonably expect, and avenues of grievance
redressal, every Insurer shall put in place Citizens' Charter specifying the service standards
both in qualitative and quantitative terms. A schedule of timelines in servicing of policies
of Life, General and Health insurer is placed at Schedule A.
1.2. To bring awareness, the citizen's charter shall be widely publicized.
Fair treatment to customers: All prospects or policyholders shall be treated equitably, honestly
and fairly at all stages of their relationship. Treating customers fairly shall be an integral part of
the corporate culture of all insurers and distribution channels. Special attention shall be given to
the needs of vulnerable groups. All insurers and distribution channels shall endeavour to deliver,
inter-alia, following outcomes in their dealings with customers:
2.1. prospects or policyholders can be confident that they are dealing with insurers and
distribution channels where the 'fair treatment of customers' is central to the corporate
culture and core values.
2.2. products solicited and services offered are designed to meet the needs of prospects or
policyholders and are targeted accordingly; and are affordable.
2.3. prospects or policyholders are provided with clear and updated information and are kept
appropriately informed before, during and after sale, including the costs (Premium, charges
etc.), risks, and exclusions or limitations.
2.4. Where prospects or policyholders receive advice, the advice is suitable and takes account
of their needs and circumstances.
2.5. prospects or policyholders are provided with product(s) which suit their requirement and
meet their reasonable expectation.
2.6. prospects or policyholders do not face post-sale barriers imposed by insurers and
distribution channels, if any, to change product, submit a claim or make a complaint.
~
50 I P age
Chapter-II
ACTIVITIES PRIOR TO SALE OF INSURANCE POLICIES
Prospectus (refer Regulation 9 (c) of the Regulations)-A prospectus of insurance product
shall be legible, avoid fine print and have font size of atleast 11. Minimum Information to be
given to customers at the time of sale:
3.1. Unique Identification Number (UIN) for the insurance product.
3.2. scope of benefits.
3.3. extent of insurance cover.
3.4. warranties, exclusions/exceptions and conditions of the insurance cover along with
explanations.
3.5. status of continuance of insurance coverage during the grace period.
3.6. a description of the contingency or contingencies to be covered by insurance.
3.7. class or classes of lives or property or any other subject eligible for insurance
3.8. In case of linked or index linked products, the funds/index offered, charges levied, including
the upper limits, underlying risks with each of the funds offered.
3.9. Criteria on which discounts in premium can be allowed and percentage of such discount
on meeting of one or more criteria.
3.10. allowable riders or add-on covers on the insurance products.
3.11. in case of life insurance, whether the product is participating (with-profits) or non-
participating (without-profits).
3.12. Exclusions specific to the policy, which can be covered on payment of additional premium.
3.13. Terms & conditions applicable in case of lapse, revival, discontinuance, surrender.
Benefit Illustration for Life insurance products
4.1. Every Insurer carrying on life insurance business shall provide at the point of sale to the
prospect or policyholder, a customized benefit illustration. It shall be in addition to the
prospectus. A minimum font size of eleven (11) shall be used to print the same as per
Schedule B.
4.2. Such benefit illustration shall form part of the policy document.
4.3. In case of online sale: Before the prospect is directed to fill up the proposal form, explicit
confirmation for Benefit Illustration from the prospect shall be obtained about their
understanding the benefits illustrated. A customized Benefit Illustration shall be provided
to the proposer immediately, thereafter.
~
~
51jPage
Suitability requirements for Life insurance products
5.1. Suitability assessment shall be done in case of savings related life insurance pr<0ducts and
annuity products except those annuities purchased from proceeds of NPS and from
employer offered superannuation fund.
i. 'Suitability information' is the information of a prospect on age, income, family
status, life stage, financial and family goals, investment objectives, insurance portfolio
already held, etc.
ii. 'Suitability Assessment' means evaluation of suitability of a product for the prospect,
based on the suitability information collected from them and considering the
nature of product, mode of premium payment and tenure of policy as well as
premium payment period.
iii. Suitability information collected and the recommendations of the sal es person
involved in solicitation, shall be preserved by the Insurer making them part of the
policy records.
5.2. Every life insurer shall have a Board approved policy on assessing the suitability of a
product to the prospect /policyholder and recommending suitable products to them.
The policy shall also dwell on the measures to curb mis-selling, force-selling and mis-
leading sales. It shall also deal with record keeping and retention thereof.
5.3. Consent of the prospect and the concerned sales person involved in the solicitation of the
business shall be obtained on the Suitability Information. In case of Suitability assessment
in online sales, express consent of the prospect/policyholder shall be obtained for
capturing suitability information. Consent can be in the form of One Time Password (OTP)
from the registered mobile number /email of the prospect only.
Premium Acknowledgement
6.1. Every insurer shall ensure that:
i. the electronic premium payment option is made available to enable the premium
payments directly to the insurer.
ii. distribution channels, if authorized to collect premiums, shall ensure that such
premium payments are not collected into their own bank account or to any third party
bank accounts except specifically permitted under the relevant Regulations /
Guidelines.
iii. acknowledgements are issued immediately on collection of premium at the point of
collection.
52 J Page
6.2. Where an insurer has authorised any distribution channel or any other person to collect
and acknowledge the receipt of premium, the Insurer shall be accountable to the premium
acknowledgements issued by such entity.
Mis-selling : Insurers or distribution channels, as applicable, shall be responsible for the
solicitation process and conduct of business applicable to them. To avoid mis-selling of
insurance policies, a mechanism shall be put in place to inter-alia include
7.:1. Ensure that fair treatment to customers is integral part of corporate culture.
7.2 Personnel authorized to solicit insurance business must use only the approved prospectus
issued by the insurer.
7.3 Sales persons of insurers or the distribution channels, as applicable, involved in the
solicitation are duly qualified and appropriately trained periodically.
7.4 Lay down a mechanism of obtaining customer feedback.
7.5 Punitive action for breach of market conduct including blacklisting the sales person who
indulge in unhealthy solicitation practices or market misconduct.
7.6 Strengthen Financial Underwriting: Insurers shall ensure that the financial underwriting
requirements are clearly spelt out to assess the continued financial capacity of the prospect
to pay the premium for the duration of the premium paying term along with the sources
available to the prospect for such premium payments.
7.7 Provide training - Periodical training shall be provided to Intermediaries, distribution
channels and their employees on their products (existing and new), TATs in policy servicing,
changes in the regulations etc.
7.8 A return in this regard shall be filed in the format specified in Master Circular on Submission
of Returns.
53 I P age
CHAPTER 111
PROPOSAL FOR SALE OF INSURANCE POLICIES
Matters to be included in proposal form [refer Regulation 10(2)]
Every Proposal form shall contain provisions to capture:
i. relevant and necessary information to underwrite the risks, to enable policy servicing
and claim servicing;
ii. nominations as per regulation 18 of IRDAI (Protection of Policyholders' Interests,
Operations and Allied Matters of Insurers) Regulations, 2024;
iii. Bank account details of prospect and the nominee;
iv. Mobile number of the prospect and email-id, if available;
v. relevant provisions of section 41 and section 45 of the Act.
Insurers shall consider the "Exit Form" submitted to the National Pension Scheme (NPS) by its
subscriber at the time of exit from NPS as the proposal form in case of offering immediate
annuity products to the NPS subscribers. Further details, if any required, such as nomination, if
not available in the exit form may be collected from the NPS subscriber.
Insurers shall endeavour to obtain the proposal form in electronic form, with proper
authentication from the concerned prospect.
In case of a physical proposal form, it may be made available in Hindi or English. However, if
requested by the prospect, the same may be made available in any of the regional languages.
Processing of the proposal Form/Underwriting:
12.1. Insurers shall process the proposal form as per Board approved underwriting policy
specific to the insurance product for which the proposal is submitted and ensure that the
information sought in the proposal form:
a) is duly filled in and complete in all aspects, and
b) put in place a mechanism to verify the correctness of the mobile numbers and the
emails provided in the proposal form and ensure that the details provided belong to
the prospect/ policyholders.
12.2. Any further requirements as required under the respective underwriting policy or
consequential documents shall be called for within 7 days from the date of receipt of the
proposal form at one time and not on piece-meal basis.
~
54 j Page
12.3. The decision on the proposal thereof, shall be communicated to the proposer within a
reasonable period but not exceeding 7 days from the date of receipt of proposal(s) or any
requirements called for by the insurer, whichever is later.
12.4. It is the duty of the insurer to furnish to the insured, with no additional charges, either a
soft copy or a hard copy of the proposal form submitted by the prospect, along with the
policy document within 15 days of the acceptance of a proposal.
Declaration
13.1. Insurer shall ensure that the proposal form has a provision for obtaining declaration by
the prospect/policyholder, in case the prospect is not familiar with the language used in
the proposal form, that details of the form are explained to him/her.
13.2. A policyholder or prospect who is a person with disability and requires assistance in
completing the proposal form, may duly authorize a representative to give declaration on
his/her behalf.
E-Proposal Form
14.1. Every insurer soliciting insurance business through electronic mode shall create an e-
proposal form similar to the physical proposal form.
14.2. The insurer shall obtain the consent directly from the prospect only from their registered
mobile number or email ID to conclude online sale, by adopting latest technological
security protocols. The insurer shall maintain evidence for the proposer's consent received
on the duly filled proposal form.
55 I P age
CHAPTER IV
ISSUANCE OF INSURANCE POLICIES
15.Matters to be stated in Insurance policies [refer regulation 11(b)]
15.1. Insurers shall use at least font size eleven (11) in insurance policies.
15.2. Policy documents shall include such other details as specified in Schedule C.
General Principles governing issuance of life, General and Health insurance policies
Insurers shall endeavour to
16.1. classify the exclusions, wherever possible as under:
(a) Standard exclusions applicable to all policies;
(b) Exclusions specific to the policy which cannot be waived;
(c) Exclusions which can be opted for cover by paying additional premium.
16.2. categorize policy conditions into following:

(a) Conditions precedent to the contract;
(b) Conditions applicable during the contract;
(c) Conditions when a claim arises;
(d) Conditions for renewal of the contract;
(e) Conditions for cancellation of the contract; and
(f) Conditions for grievances redressal.
16.3. Insurers shall mandatorily include in the policy document all the applicable exclusions for
a particular product. No further deductions shall be made from the claim amount in the
name of any other exclusions.
Customer Information Sheet (CIS)
17.1. Every Insurer shall have in place a Customer Information Sheet (CIS) that explains
policyholders in simple words, the basic features, terms and conditions of the policy in the
format specified in Schedule D separately for Life, General and health insurance
products.
17.2. Every insurer shall forward the Customer Information Sheet (CIS) to the policyholder,
along with the policy document and shall ensure compliance with the following:
a. All details provided for in the CIS shall be duly filled in.
b. The CIS shall have minimum font size 11.
c. CIS shall be made available in regional languages if the policyholder so desires.
~ 561 Page

d. Insurers or distribution channels, as the case may be, shall forward the CIS to all
policyholders and shall obtain acknowledgement either in physical or digital form.
e. The policy document forwarding letter shall contain a cross reference to the CIS.
17 .3. Where any inconsistency has been pointed out by the prospect / policyholder, the
insurer shall ensure that the same is addressed in a time bound manner.
Use of Digilocker facility

To enable the policyholder to use Digilocker, Insurers shall enable their IT systems to interact
with the Digilocker and shall publish such enablement for the information of the policyholders.
~

57 I P age
CHAPTERV
SERVICING OF POLICYHOLDERS AND SETTLEMENT OF CLAIMS
Servicing of Policyholders

All insurers shall endeavour to establish appropriate technology based infrastructure to handle
servicing of policyholders and list all possible services that the policyholder can a"1ail. It may
facilitate submission of service request from the policyholder through on line, check the status
of service request, seeking further information or clarification, submission of details or
clarifications amongst others.
Settlement of claims
If a claim intimation is received at the distribution channels or TPA or Hospital as the case may
be, it shall have necessary system in place to immediately forward the claim intimat ion details
to the insurer.
Insurers shall endeavour to establish appropriate technology based infrastructure to handle
all the claims processing facilitating registration of claims intimation, providing
acknowledgements, submission of documents etc.
No claim shall be rejected or closed for want of documents or for delayed intimation of claim.
Insurers shall have claims manual/ standard operating procedures (S0Ps) that are reviewed
periodically and must ensure that claims are settled as per the specified Turn Around Times
(TA Ts).
CHAPTER-VI
PORTABILITY OF HEALTH INSURANCE POLICIES
Portability of Health Insurance Policies
24.1. Insurers shall allow portability in respect of all individual, family floater and group health
insurance policies at the time of renewal.
24.2. A policyholder desirous of porting his/her policy to another insurer shall apply to such
insurer to port the entire policy along with all the members of the family, if any, at least
30 days before, but not earlier than 60 days from the due date for renewal.
Provided that Insurers are free to consider proposal for portability even if the policyholder
has approached within 15 days from the renewal date of the existing policy, but in all such
cases acquiring insurer shall ensure that there is no break in policy.
24.3. The acquiring insurer shall furnish to the policyholder, the Portability Form authorizing it
to obtain policy and claim related information from the existing insurer. The policyholder
58 I P a g e

shall fill in the portability form along with proposal form and submit the same to the
acquiring insurer.
2 4 .4. On receipt of the Portability Form, the acquiring insurer shall seek the necessary details
of policy and previous claim information, if any, from the existing insurer t hrough the
portal maintained by Insurance Information Bureau of India (118) https://iib.gov.in/ portal.

24.5. The existing insurer, shall furnish the requisite data for porting insurance pol icies within
72 hours of the receipt of the request. The Acquiring insurer shall decide and
communicate on the proposal immediately but not more than 5 days of receipt of
information from Existing insurer.

24.6. The policyholder is entitled to transfer the credits gained to the extent of the Sum Insured,
No Claim Bonus, specific waiting periods, waiting period for pre-existing disease,
Moratorium period etc. from the policy of Existing Insurer to the new policy issued by the
Acquiring Insurer.
24. 7. On the port-in policies during the port-in year, acquiring insurer shall not pay any
commission or incentive to its own employees or distribution channel or employees of the
distribution channel. No charges shall be levied on the policyholder for porting-in or
porting-out.
59 I P age
CHAPTER VII
COMPLIANCE WITH JUDCIAL / QUASI JUDICIAL AWARDS ETC.
Ombudsman Awards

All insurers and distribution channel shall ensure that:
25.1. As specified in rule 17 (6), all the ombudsman awards passed in favour of the
policyholders / claimant are to be paid within 30 days from the date of receipt of the
awards.
25.2. The insurer, in terms of rule 17 (7) of Insurance Ombudsman Rules, 2017, shall also pay
penal interest at a rate, which is 2 percent above bank rate from the date the claim ought
to have been settled.
25.3. In cases where the Insurer prefers an appeal against the award of the Ombudsman, such
appeal against the award shall be filed within the stipulated time limit of 30 days only.
25.4. The Insurer is required to comply with the award of the Insurance Ombudsman within 30
days of receipt of award by the Insurer. In case the Insurer does not honour the
ombudsman award, a penalty of Rs. 5000/-per day shall be payable to the complainant.
Such penalty is in addition to the penal interest liable to be paid by the Insurer under the
Insurance Ombudsman Rules, 2017. This provision will not be applicable in case insurer
chooses to appeal against the award of the Insurance Ombudsman.
Other Judicial / Quasi-Judicial Awards
26.1. Orders of Judicial / Quasi-Judicial bodies are to be complied within the time frame
stipulated in the order or award.
26.2. In cases where time frame is not specified in the order/ award, the order/award should
be complied within 45 days of the receipt of the order/ award by the Insurer.
26.3. In cases where the Insurer prefers an appeal against the order of the Judicial / Quasi-
Judicial body, such appeal should be preferred within the stipulated time limit as per the
rules applicable. The Complainant should be informed in the matter immediately.
26.4. Quarterly statement on the status of court cases as per the format provided in Master
Circular on Submission of Returns shall be submitted to the Authority.
~

60 IP age
CHAPTER VIII
OTHER SERVICES RELATED ASPECTS
Life Verification Certification
Insurers shall put in place necessary technology based systems like using biomet ric enabled
digital service to have life verification certification for annuity payouts.
Website
Every insurer should have a website publishing information about services offered, FAQs on
policy servicing aspects, facilities for enquiry, lodging of complaints, etc. in addition to the
disclosure mandated by the Authority. Insurers shall provide a search tool on their website
for verification of distribution channels they are engaged with. There should be a facility for
a prospect/policyholder to fetch the distribution channels in a specified location to whom
they can approach, for purchasing an insurance policy and service the lead generated.
Training:
Insurer shall provide periodical training to distribution channels and employees of the
Insurers on their products (existing and new), TATs in policy servicing, changes in the
regulations etc.
Technology solutions:
The insurer shall endeavor to put in place technology solutions so as to ensure an effective,
efficient and a seamless onboarding of policyholders, objective suitability assessment (in
case of life insurance policies), renewal of policy, servicing of policies, registering and
changing nominations, grievance redressal and claim settlement process.
6 1IPage
CHAPTER IX
Repeal of the Guidelines and Circulars
List of Circulars/ Guidelines repealed
31.1. This Master Circular supersedes the following Guidelines/Circulars:
s. Circular/Guideline Reference Description
No. Number '
028/IRDA/LIFE/PAN/ Aug-2009 Requirement of PAN for Insurance Products
3/CA/GRV/YPB/10-11 DATED Guidelines on Grievance Redressal by
27.07.2010 Insurance Companies
IRDA/ CAD/CIR/AGN/137 /08 DATED Disclosure of Agency detail on policy
25.08.2010 document
IRDA/IT/ORD/MIS/15/2/09/2010 Implementation of Integrated Grievances
Management System (IGMS)
CAD/lnsu.Omb/10-11 dated 23.11.2010 Awards passed by Insurance Ombudsman
CAD/01/10-11 DATED 21.01.2011 Verification of the Authenticity of calls
IRDA/HLTH/MISC/CIR/216/09/2011 Circular on Delay in claim
intimation/documents submission with
respect to All life insurance contracts and
All Non-life individual and group insurance
contracts
IRDAI/ HLT/ REG/ CIR/ 298 / 12 / 2020 Disclosure of benefit/ premium illustration
for Health insurance policies issued on
floater basis
IRDA/Life/MISC/Cir/153/08/2013 ECS mandate under Life Insurance Policies
1.0. IRDA/LIFE/CIR/GDL/034/01/2014 Standard Format for Filing of Policy
Documents with the Authority
1.1. IRDA/Life/Misc/Cir/106/05/2015 Guidelines on issuance of Premium
Acknowledgements
IRDAI/Cir/Misc/194/11/2015 dated Non-compliance of Awards of Insurance
03.11.2015 Ombudsman or Order of MACT of consumer
62 JP age
s. Circular/Guideline Reference Description
No. Number
IRDA/LIFE/CIR/MISC/140/8/2015 Obtaining Annuity Options from the Policy
holders
IRDAI/CAD/CIR/MISC/01/2016 Dated Grievance Redressal Processes-Instruction
31.01.2016
IRDAI/CAD/CIR/MISC/03/2016 Dated Non-compliance of awards
31.03.2016
IRDAI/SDD/MISC/CIR/135/07 /2016 Operationalisation of Central KYC Records
Registry (CKYCR)
IRDA/LIFE/CIR/MISC/134/07 /2016 Advance Discharge Voucher
I RDA/NL/Cl R/MISC/149/06/2017 Delay in Claim Intimation/ Documents
Submission
IRDAI/Life/Misc/Cir/202/12/2018 Intimation of receipt of premium through
SMS by the Insurer to the Policyholders
IRDAI/LIFE/CIR/173/09/2019 DATED Benefit Illustration and other market
26.09.2019 conduct aspects
IRDAI/CAD/CIR/MISC/001/01/2019 Submission of quarterly statement on mis-
DATED 21.01.2019 selling complaints
IRDAI/CAD/CIR/MISC/038/03/2019 Non-compliance of awards passed by
DATED 05.03.2019 Ombudsman
Nil dated 04.09.2020 Cell for Redressal of grievance of
Policyholders
INSTRUCTION DATED 18.04.2022 Revised Instruction on PRAGATI
IRDAI/CAD/CIR/MISC/105/05/2022 Adhering the timelines of awards
DATED 26.05.2022 settlement as per Ombudsman Rules.
IRDAI/ INT/ CIR/ DGLKR/ 030102/2021 Issuance of digital insurance policies by
insurance companies via Digilocker
I RDAI/Life/Misc/CI R/116/05/2020 Circular on Pre-Issuance Verification Call
(PIVC)
63 I Page

s. Circular/Guideline Reference Description
No. Number
LC/SP/SI/VER 1.0 Illustrations - Life Insurance Business:
Standards of Practices
IRDA/NL/CIR/MISC/214/2016 Delay in Claim Intimation and documents
submission with respect to individual life,
non-life and group non-life insurance
contracts
IRDAI/Life/CIR/MISC/188/09/2022 Immediate Annuity Products
64[Page
s.

SCHEDULE-A-Citizens' Charter
(refer clause 1.1)
CITIZENS' CHARTER (LIFE)
BASIC SERVICE STANDARDS
DESCRIPTION OF ITEM OF SERVICE
Regulatory
Turnaround
No SERVICE T ime
1 New Business Proposal Processing of Insurance Proposal and

2

3

4
Processing seeking further requirements for
consideration of the proposal
Decision on proposal from the date of 7 days
receipt of proposal or from the date of
Post Policy Service
Request
Free-Look Cancellation
Policy Servicing
receipt of additional requirement
whichever is later
Providing copy of the policy along with the
proposal form
Post Policy Service Requests concerning
mistakes / corrections in the Policy
document
Free Look Cancellation & Refund from the
date of receipt of request
Change of Address (KYC Norms to be
complied)
Registration /Change of Nomination,
Assignment.
Inclusion of new member in case of group
(from the date of receipt policy
of request for the service t--c-::------,,----------,---~---,--,..,.------,----------, Alteration in ORIGINAL POLICY
specified) CONDITIONS (where applicable)
Policy loan
15 days
7 days
7 days
651 Page
s. Regulatory
DESCRIPTION OF ITEM OF SERVICE Turnaround
No SERVICE T ime
Unit / Index Linked Insurance Policy-
Switch, Top-up, and other related Services.
Decision on Policy Revival after receipt of
all requirements.
Issue of Premium Payment Certificates
(PPC)
Issue of Duplicate Policy 7 days
5 Death claims Death claims settlements (not requiring 15 days
investigations)

Early death claims requiring investigations
decision & payment
45 days
6 Survival, Maturity, annuity Settlement of Maturity Claims
payments
Settlement of Survival Benefits On due date

Annuity payments/ Pension Payment
Surrender or partial withdrawal of Policy 7 days
7 Auto Action by the Insurer Premium Due Intimation
One month
Policy payments information (Survival before due date
Benefits, Maturity Benefits, etc.)

Acknowledgement to complainant Immediately
Action on Complaint &
8 Complaints^14 days
Intimation of Decision to the complainant
If complaint is NOT resolved by the Insurer, (^14) days from
communicate the details to the original date of
661 p 8 g e

s. Reg;ulatory
DESCRIPTION OF ITEM OF SERVICE Tur111around
No SERVICE Time

Policyholder of options including referring receip1t: of
the complainant to Insurance Ombudsman complaint. *
/ Consumer Court.
*(The policyholder may approach the Insurance Ombudsman if his / her compl aint is not
resolved within 30 days or if the decision of the company is not acceptable to the policyholder.)
~

671 Page
s.
No SERVICE
1 New Business Proposal
Processing

Post
2

Policy Service
Request
Policy Servicing
(from the date of receipt
of request for the service
specified)
3

4 Claims

CITIZENS' CHARTER (General)
BASIC SERVICE STANDARDS
DESCRIPTION OF r ITEM OF SERVICE
Processing of Insurance Proposal and
seeking further requirements for
consideration of the proposal.
Decision on proposal from the date of
receipt of proposal or from the date of
receipt of additional requirement
whichever is later.
Providing copy of the policy along with the
proposal form
Post Policy Service Requests concerning
mistakes I corrections in the Policy
document
Change of Address (KYC Norms to be
complied)
Registration /Change of Nomination,
Assignment.
Alteration in Original Policy conditions
(where applicable)
Change of location of risk
Inclusion of new member in case of group
policies
Any other non-claim related changes
Cancellation of policy and refund of
premium
Appointment of Surveyors (through Tech
based solution)
Submission of final report after receiving
Insurer's request
Communicating acceptance or rejection of
the claim
Reg1Ulatory
Turnaround Time
7 days
15 days
7 days
24 hours
15 days
7 days
68 IP age
s. Reg:ulatory
No SERVICE DESCRIPTION OF ITEM OF SERVICE Turnaround Time
5 Auto Action by the Insurer Premium Due Intimation One month before
due date
Acknowledgement to complainant lmmedic:1tely
Action on Complaint &
Intimation of Decision to the complainant
14 days
6 Complaints If complaint is NOT resolved by the Insurer, 14 days from
communicate the details to the original date of
Policyholder of options including referring
the complainant to Insurance Ombudsman receipt of
/ Consumer Court. complaint. *
*(The policyholder may approach the Insurance Ombudsman if his/ her complaint is not resolved
within 30 days or if the decision of the company is not acceptable to the policyholder.)

Expectation from the Policyholder -
Immediate intimation of claims in writing.
Preservation of Salvage.
Filing of first information report with Police Authorities
In case of Fire, Theft and Accidental Death claims
Preservation of recovery rights by filing claims with carriers in case of marine claims
Intimating the Fire brigade and obtaining Fire brigade report.
Preservation of all records for Company's verification.
NOTE: For detailed information regarding other related documents required for claims, reference
may be made for policy document and / or Claim procedure manual available in their
website.
jy

691 Page
s.
No SERVICE
1 New Business Proposal
Processing

Post Policy Service
(^2) Request
Policy Servicing
(from the date of
receipt of request for
3 the service specified)
4 Claims
CITIZENS' CHARTER (HEALTH)
BASIC SERVICE STANDARDS
DESCRIPTION OF ITEM OF SERVICE
Processing of Insurance Proposal and seeking
further requirements for consideration of the
proposal
Decision on proposal from the date of receipt of
proposal or from the date of receipt of
additional requirement whichever is later
Providing copy of the policy along with the
proposal form
Free look cancellation and refund of deposit
from the date of receipt of the request
Post Policy Service Requests concerning
mistakes/ corrections in the Policy document
Change of Address (KYC Norms to be complied)
Registration /Change of Nomination,
Assignment.
Alteration in Original Policy Conditions (where
applicable)
Issuance of duplicate policy
Inclusion of new member in case of group
policies
Any other non-claim related changes
Cancellation of policy and refund of premium
Acceptance of cashless claims by TPA
/company to Hospital and communicate to
them
TPA's offer of settlement to the Insurer I
Hospital after submission of document
Settlement of claims (other than cashless)
Regulatory
Turnar,ound Time
7 days
15 days
7 days
7 days
7 days
1 hour
3 hours
15 days
70 I P age

s. DESCRIPTION OF ITEM OF SERVICE Regulatory
No SERVICE Turnaround Time
5 Auto Action by the Premium Due Intimation One m -onth before
Insurer due date
Acknowledge to complaint lmmecl iately
Action on Complaint &
Intimation of Decision to the complainant^14 days

6 Complaints If complaint is NOT resolved by the Insurer,^14 d ays from
communicate the details to the Policyholder of original date of
options including referring the complainant to receipt of
Insurance Ombudsman / Consumer Court complaint. *

*(The policyholder may approach the Insurance Ombudsman if his/ her complaint is not resolved
within 30 days or if the decision of the company is not acceptable to the policyholder.
71 1Page
Schedule B
Form and manner of policy documents and Benefits Illustration
(refer clause 4.1)
All insurers shall provide benefit illustration as per the requirements of each product or
combination of products and is customized as per requirements of the prospect, if required.
Insurers shall also provide customized benefit illustration in the format on their websites so as
to enable the customers to make out the difference while opting for coverage.
Every insurer shall, as applicable, provide benefit illustrations to prospects or policyhol ders at the
point of sale for all products, except for the following products:
a. Regular Premium Pure term products
b. Regular Premium Pure health products
c. Group term products
d. Group credit life products
e. Group fund based products
The calculation of net yield for Linked products is illustrated for the information of insurers.
The illustrations shall be clear and fair to enable a customer to make an informed decision. They
shall clearly distinguish between guaranteed and non-guaranteed benefits and state that the
quantum of benefits in respect of non-guaranteed category may vary.
Insurers shall review the assumptions used in the benefit illustrations during the annual actuarial
valuation and revise the benefit illustrations wherever required.
Except for those life insurance products where all the benefits are assured in absolute amounts
at the outset of the contract, all other life insurance products shall provide the prospective
policyholder a customized benefit illustration at the point of sale, illustrating the guaranteed and
non-guaranteed benefits at gross investment returns as stipulated by the Authority. Considering
the dynamic nature of movement of interest rates, such gross investment returns are currently
stipulated as 4% p.a. and 8% p.a, for other than annuity products.
The benefit illustration shall be part of the sales literature and shall be furnished to the
prospective policyholder along with the sales literature before concluding the sale.
721Page
The format of benefit illustration is given as under
9.1. Annexure 1: Bl for Linked Life Insurance Products
9.2. Annexure 2: Bl for Linked Pension Products
9.3. Annexure 3: Annual Disclosure for pension products
9.4. Annexure 4: Bl for Non-Linked Participating Life Insurance Products
9.5. Annexure 5: Bl for Non-Linked Participating Pension Products
9.6. Annexure 6: Bl for Non-Linked Non-Participating Life Insurance Products
9.7. Annexure 7: Bl for non-Linked Non-Participating Pension Products
9.8. Annexure 8: Bl for Non-Linked Non-Participating Annuity Products
9.9. Annexure 9: Illustration for calculation of Reduction in Yield (RIY) for Linked Life Insurance
Products.
73 I P age
Annexure 1 : BI for Linked Insurance Products -Life
[ Proposal No.
Name of the Prospect/Policy holder: Name of the Product:
Age: Tag line:
Name of life assured: Unique identification no.
Age: GST rate:
Sum assured: Investment Strategy opted for
Policy Term & Premium Payment Term: Funds opted along with their risk level
Amount of Instalment premium (Please specify the customer specific fund option)
Mode of payment of premium
How to read and understand this benefit illustration?
This benefit illustration is intended to show what charges are deducted from your premiums and how the unit fund, net of charges and taxes, may grow over the years of the policy tenn if the
fund earns a gross retw·n of8% p.a. or 4% p.a. These rates, i.e., 8% p.a. and 4% p.a. are assumed only for the purpose of illustrating the flow of benefits if the returns are at this level. It should
not be interpreted that the returns under the plan are going to be either 8% p.a. or 4% p.a.
Net yield mentioned corresponds to the gross investment return of 8% p.a. net of all charges but does not consider mmtality, morbidity charges, underwriting extra if any, guarantee
charges and cost of riders, if deducted by cancellation of units. It demonstrates the impact of charges and taxes on the net yield. Please note that the mmtality charges per thousand
sum assured, in general increases with age.

~^741 Page

The actual returns can vary depending on the performance of the chosen fund, charges towards mortality, morbidity, underwriting extra, cost ofriders etc., The investment risk in this policy
i5 borne by tile policy holder, hence, for more details on terms and conditions please read sales literature carefully.
Part A of this statement presents a summary view of year-by-year charges deducted under the policy, fund value surrender Value and the death benefit, at two assumed rates ofreturn. Part B
of this statement presents a detailed break-up of the charges and other values.
Part A (Amount in Rupees.)
Policy Annualized
Year Premium At 4% p.a. Gross Investment Return At 8% p.a. Gross Investment Return
Mortality, Other GST Fund at Surrender Death Mortality, Other GST Fund at Surrender Death
Morbidity Charges* End of Value Benefit Morbidity Charges* End of Value Benefit
Charges Year Charges Year
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14

*See Part B for details.

IN THIS POLICY, THE INVESTMENT RISK IS BORNE BY THE POLICYHOLDER AND THE ABOVE INTEREST RATES ARE ONLY FOR ILLUSTRATIVE
PURPOSE.
~

75 I P age
I, .............................. (name), have explained the
premiums, charges and benefits under the policy fully to the
prospect/ policyholder.

Place
Date: Signature of Agent/Intermediary/ Official of the Insurer

I, ........................... (name), having received the information with respect to
the above, have understood the above statement before entering into the
contract.
Date: Signature of Prospect/ Policyholder
~

76 IP age
Part B Gross 8%p.a Net Amount in Rupees
Yield Yield
Policy Annualized Premium Annualized Mortality GST Policy Guarantee Other Additions Fund FMC Fund Surrend Death
Year Premium Allocation Premium Premium - charge, Admin. charge charges* to the before at End er Benefit
(AP) Charge Allocation Morbidity Charge fund' FMC of Year Value
(PAC) Charges Charges
Gross 4% p.a Amount in Rupees
Yield
Policy Annualized Premium Annual Mortality GST Policy Guarantee Other Additions Fund FMC Fund at Surrender
Year Allocation Annualized Premium - charge, Admin. charge charges* to the before End of
Premium Charge Premium Morbidity Charge fund* FMC Year
(AP) (PAC) Allocation Charges Charges
*Specify details, if any.
Notes:
i Refer the sales literature for explanation of terms used in this illustration.
Fund management charge is based on the specific fund option(s) chosen.
In case rider charges are collected explicitly through collection of rider premium, and not by way of cancellation of units, then, such charges are not considered in this illustration. In other cases,
rider charges are included in other charges.
Value
Death
Benefit
I, ............... (name), have explained the premiums, charges and benefits under the policy II' ..................... (name), having received the information with respect to the above, have understood the above
~ully to the prospect/ policyholder. ~tatement before entering into the contract.

Place & Date
Signature of Agent/ Intermediary/ Official of the Insurer Date: Signature of Prospect/ Policyholder
··~
1/ 771Page

Name of the Prospect/Policy holder:
Age:
Name of life assured:
Age:
Sum assured:
Policy Term & Premium Payment Term:
Amount of Instalment premium
Mode of payment of premium
How to read and understand this benefit illustration?
Annexure 2 : BI for Linked Insurance Products - Pension
Name of the Product:
Tag line:
Unique identification no.
GST rate:
Investment Strategy opted for
Funds opted along with their risk level
[ Proposal No.
(Please specify the customer specific fund option)
Vesting age
This benefit illustration is intended to show what charges are deducted from your premiums and how the unit fund, net of charges and taxes, may grow over the years of the
policy term if the fund earns a gross return of 8% p.a. or 4% p.a. These rates, i.e., 8% p.a. and 4% p.a. are assumed only for the purpose of illustrating the flow of benefits if
the returns are at this level. It should not be interpreted that the retw·ns under the plan are going to be either 8% p.a. or 4% p.a.

Net yield mentioned coJTesponds to the gross investment return of 8% p.a. net of all charges but does not consider m01tality, morbidity charges, underwriting extra if any,
guarantee charges and cost of riders, if deducted by cancellation of units. It demonstrates the impact of charges and taxes on the net yield. Please note that the mmtality
charges per thousand sum assured in general, increases with age.

The actual returns can vary depending on the performance of the chosen fund, charges towards mortality, morbidity, underwriting extra, cost of riders etc., The investment
risk in this policy is borne by the policy holder. Hence, for more details on terms and conditions please read sales literature carefully.

Pait A of this statement presents a summary view of year-by-year charges deducted under the policy, fund value smTender Value, and the death benefit, at two assumed rates
ofreturn. Pait B of this statement presents a detailed break-up of the charges and other values.

►

78 IP age
Part A (Amount in Rupees.)

Policy Annualized At 4% p.a. Gross Investment Return At 8% p.a. Gross Investment Return
Year Premium
Mortality, Other GST Fund at Surrender Death Mortality, Other GST Fund at Surrender Death
Morbidity Charges* Value Benefit Morbidity Charges* Value Benefit
Charges End of Year Charges End of Year
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
*See Part B for details.
Annuity Option Selected (The option can be changed any time before vesting)
Fund Value (FV) at Vesting * Annuity Payable p.a.
Accumulated at Accumulated Minimum Assured Based on FV Based on FV Based on the Minimum Assured Benefit, if
4%p.a. (Rs.) at 8% p.a. Benefit if any accumulated at 4% accumulated at 8% any. (Rs.)
(Rs.) (Rs.) Minimum rate p.a. (Rs.) p.a. (Rs.)
of return on the
premiums paid
% p.a.)
The values shown above are for illustration purpose only. The actual annuity amount depends on the prevailing annuity rates at
the time of vesting. The amounts of annuity based on the assumed investment returns of 8% p.a., and 4% p.a. are not upper or
lower limits of what you might get back. For more details on risk factors, terms and conditions please read sales brochure
carefully.

*without commutation
y
791 Page
IN THIS POLICY, THE INVESTMENT RISK IS BORNE BY THE POLICYHOLDER AND THE ABOVE INTEREST RATES ARE ONLY FOR ILLUSTRATIVE
PURP05E.
Part B
Policy Annualized Premium ~nnualized Mortality GST
Year Premium Allocation Premium- charge,
(AP) Charge Premium Morbidity
(PAC) Allocation charge
Charges
Policy Annualized Premium Annualized Mortality GST
Year Premium Allocation Premium - charge,
(AP) Charge Premium Morbidity
(PAC) Allocation charge
Charges
*Specify details, if any.

Notes: 1. Refer the sales literature for explanation of terms used in this illustration
Fund management charge is based on the specific fund option(s) chosen.
Policy
Admin.
Charge
Policy
Admin.
Charge
Gross 8% p.a Net Amount in Rupees
Yield Yield
Guarantee Other Additions Fund FMC Fund Surrender
charge charges* to the before at End Value
fund" FMC of Year
Gross 4% p.a Amount in Rupees
Yield
Guarantee Other Additions Fund FMC Fund at Surrender
charge charges* to the before End of Value
fund* FMC Year
In case rider charges are collected explicitly through collection of rider premium, and not by way of cancellation of units, then, such charges are not considered in this
illustration. In other cases, rider charges are included in other charges.
fr
80 IP age
Death
Benefit
Death
Benefit
I, ........ (name), have explained the premiums, charges and benefits I, .................. (name), having received the information with respect to the above, have
'Ut1diH the pol Icy fully to the prospect/ policyholder. understood the above statement before entering into the contract.

Place & Date: Date: Signature of Prospect/Policyholder
Signature of Agent/Intermediary/Official of the insurer
~

81IPage
Policy number:
Date of commencement:
Name of the Policy holder:
Age:
Sum assured:
Policy Term & Premium Payment Tenn:
Amount of instalment premium
Mode of payment of premium
Vesting age:
Assured Benefit*
Minimum Rate of Return on the premiums paid
(% p .a)
Absolute amount on vesting Rs.

Policy Year Available / accumulated amount
For commutation I For annuitization
CmTent year
Vesting year
Annexure 3 : Annual Disclosure for Pension Products
(For Linked and Non-Linked)
Name of the Product:
Unique Identification No:
Annuity payable p.a. on the basis of prevailing annuity rates
Annuity option selected (The option can be changed any time
before vesting)
Commutation Percentage assumed
Amount in Rs.
Amount of Annuity based Expected accumulated Amount based Expected amount of annuity
011 prevailing annuity 011 based on
rates 4%p.a. 8%p.a 4%p.a 8%p.a
*Mandatory for Non-linked Products. For Linked Products, as per the approved tenns and conditions.
Notes: The values above are for illustration purpose only. The actual annuity amount receivable depends on the prevailing annuity rates at the time of vesting. The assumed
investment returns of 8% p.a. and 4% p.a, these are not upper or lower limits or what you might get back.
Place:
Date: Signature of Authorized official of the Insurer
~
~
Company Seal
82 IP age
Name of the Prospect/Policy holder:
Age:
Name of life assured:
Age:
Policy Tenn
Premium Payment Tenn:
Amount oflnstalment premium
Mode of Payment of Premium:
[ Annexure 4 : BI for Non - Linked Par Products - Life
[ Proposal No.
Name of the Product:
Tag line:
Unique Identification No.
GST Rate:
How to read and understand this benefit illustration?
This benefit illustration is intended to show year-wise premiums payable and benefits under the policy, at two assumed rate~ of interest, i.e., 8% p.a and 4% p.a.
Some benefits are guaranteed and some benefits are variable with returns based on the future perfonnance of your insurer canying on life insurance business. If your policy
offers guaranteed benefits, then these will be clearly marked ' guaranteed' in the illustration table on this page. If your policy offers variable benefits, then the illustration on
this page will show two different rates of assumed future investment returns of 8% p.a. and 4% p.a. These assumed rates of return are not guaranteed and they are not the
upper or lower limits of what you might get back, as the value of your policy is dependent on a number of factors including future investment performance.
Policy Details
Policy option Sum Assured Rs.
Bonus type Sum Assured on Death (at inception
of the policy) Rs.

Premium Summary
Base Plan Riders Total instalment Premium
Instalment Premium without GST
Instalment Premium with first year GST
Instalment Premium with GST 2 nd year onwards
~

83 I P age
Notes: annualised premium excludes underwriting extra premium, frequency loadings on premiums, the premiums paid towards the riders, if any and Goods
& Service Tax. Refer Sales literature for explanation of terms used in this literature.
Single/ Guaranteed benefits Non - Guaranteed p.a Benefits @4%
Policy Annualiz ed
Year premium
Guaranteed Additions/ct Surviv al GSV Death Benefits Mat urity Rever sionar Cash Bonus ssv Surr ende
her guarantees Benefi ts efits Ben y Bonus r Bene
fits

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
I, ......................... (name), have explained the premiums and benefits under the
product fully to the prospect/policyholder.
Place:
Date: Signature of Agent/Intermediary/Official of the insurer
)Y

Non - Guaranteed 8% p.a Benefits @
Total Benefits Including Guaranteed and Non-
Guaranteed Maturity Benefits Benefits Death Benefits
Rever sionar Cash Bo V ss Surr ende Total Total Total Death Total Benefits incl Death of
y Bonus nus r Bene Maturity Benefits Maturity Benefits s Benefit incl Terminal any@8% Bonus if
fits Termina Incl Incl Termina of Termin
I Bonus if any@ I Bonus if any@ al Bonus
4% 8% if @4% any
12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
I, ........................ (name), having received the information with respect to
the above, have understood the above statement before entering into
the contract
Date: Signature of prospect/ Policyholder
84 IP a g e
Annexure 5: Bl for Non-Linked Par Products - Pension
Proposal No.
Name of the prospect/Policyholder: Name of the Product:
Age: Tag Line:
Name of the Life Assured: Unique Identification No:
Age: GST Rate:
Policy Term: Vesting Age:
Premium Payment term:
Amount of Instalment Premium:
Mode of Payment of Premium:
How to read and understand this benefit illustration?
This benefit illustration is intended to show year-wise premiums payable and benefits under the policy, at two assumed rates of interest i.e. 8% p.a. and 4%
p.a.
Some benefits are guaranteed, and some benefits are variable with returns based on the future performance of your insurer carrying on the life insurance
business. If your policy offers guaranteed benefits, then these will be clearly marked "guaranteed" in the illustration table on this page. If your policy offers
variable benefits, then the illustrations on this page will show two different rates assumed future investment returns of 8%. p.a. and 4%. p.a. These assumed
rates of return are not guaranteed and they are not the upper or lower limits of what you might get back, as the value of your policy is dependent on a number
of factors including future investment performance.

Policy Option
Bonus Type
Instalment Premium without GST
Instalment Premium with First Year GST
Instalment Premium with GST 2 nd Year Onwards
Policy Details
I Sum Assured Rs.
I Sum Assured on Death (at inception of the policy) Rs.
Premium Summary
Base Plan
y ~

Riders
I
I
Total Instalment Premium
85 IP age
Pol Guaranteed benefits Non - Guaranteed Benefits @ Non - Guaranteed Benefits @ Total Benefits Including
icy 4% p.a 8% p.a Guaranteed and Non-
Ye Single I Guaranteed Benefits
ar Annualized Maturity
premium Benefits Death Benefits
Guara Sur GSV De Mat Revers Cash s Surre Revers Cash s Surre Total Total Total
nteed vival ath urity ionary Bonus s nder ionary Bonus s nder Matu Matur Death
Additi Ben Ben Ben Bonus V Bene Bonus V Bene rity ity Benef
ans efit efit efit fit fit Ben Benef Total it incl
efit its Death of
Incl Incl Benefit Termi
Ter incl of nal
mina Termi Termina Bonu
I Bonu nal I Bonus s if
Bon s if if any any
us if @4% @8%
any any
@ @
4% 8%
(^1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19)
Annuity Option Selected (The option can be changed any time before vesting)
Proceeds at Vesting *Annuity payable p.a based on prevailing annuity rates
Accumulated at 4% p.a. Accumulated at 8% Minimum Assured benefit Based on FV accumulated Based on FV Based on the Minimum
Rs. p.a. Rs. Rs. Minimum rate of at 4% p.a Rs. accumulated at 8% Assured Benefit Rs.
return on the p.a Rs.
premium paid (%
p.a.)

without commutation
Note: The values shown above are for illustration purpose only. The actual annuity amount receivable depends on the prevailing annuity rates at the times of
vesting. The guaranteed values are based on the minimum investment return guaranteed at the outset of the policy. Whereas the non-guaranteed values are
based on the assumed investment returns of 4% p.a. and 8% p.a. these are not upper or lower limits of what you might get back. For more details on risk factors,
~
861 Page
terms and conditions please read sales brochure carefully. Annualized premium excludes underwriting extra premium frequency loadings on premium, the
pr~mium paid towards the riders, If any, and Goods & Services Tax. Refer the sales literature for explanation of terms used in this illustration.

1 ......................... (name), have explained the premiums and
benefits under the product fully to the prospect/policyholder.
Place:
Date: 1. ....................... (name), having received the information with
Signature of Agent/Intermediary/Official of the insurer respect to the above, have understood the above statement
before entering into the contract
Date:
~
~
Signature of prospect/ Policyholder
871 Page
Name of the Prospect/Policy holder:
Age:
Name of life assured:
Age:
Policy tenn:
Premium Payment Term:
Amount offnstalment premium:

/ Annexul'e 6! BI for Non -Linked Non Par Products-Life
Proposal No:
Name of the Product:
Tag line:
Unique Identification No.
GST Rate:
This benefit illustration is intended to show year - wise premiums payable and benefits under the Policy
Policy Details
Policy option Sum Assured Rs.
Sum Assured on Death( at inception
of the policy) Rs.
Premium Summary
Base Plan Riders Total instalment
Premium
Instalment Premium without GST
Instalment Premium with first year GST
Instalment Premium with GST 2 nd year onwards
Policy Single/Annualized Guaranteed Non-Guaranteed
year Premium Survival Other Maturity Death guaranteed Special swTender
benefits/Loyalty Benefits Benefit Benefit surrender value (SSV)
Additions if any value (GSV)
surrender value
payable
Note : Annualized premium excludes underwriting extra premium, frequency loadings on premiums, the premiums paid towards the riders, if any and Goods & Service Tax.
(name), have explained the premiums and benefits under
the product fully to the prospect/policyholder.
Place:
Date:
1 .......... .............. (name), having received the information with respect to the
above, have understood the above statement before entering into the
contract
Signature of Agent/Intermediary/Official of the insurer I Date: Signature of prospect/ Policyholder
~

88 IP age
Name of the Proposed/Policy holder:
Age:
Name of life assured:
Age:
Sum assured:
Policy Tenn
Premium Payment Term:
Amount of Instalment premium:
Mode of Premium Payment:

I Annexure 7: BI for Non -Linked non par Products -Pension
Proposal No:
Name of the Product:
Tag line:
Unique Identification No.
GST Rate:
Vesting Age:
This benefit illustration is intended to show year - wise premiums payable and benefits under the Policy.
Policy Details
Policy option Sum Assured Rs.
Sum Assured on Death ( at inception
of the policy) Rs.
Premium Summary
Base Plan Riders Total instalment
Premium
Instalment Premium without GST
Instalment Premium with first year GST
Instalment Premium with GST 2 nd year onwards
(Amounts in rupees)
Policy Single/ Annualized Guaranteed Non-Guaranteed
year Premium Survival Other Maturity Death guaranteed Special surrender value
benefits/Loyalty Benefits Benefit Benefit surrender
Additions ifanv value
Annuity payable p.a, based on prevailing annuity rates (Rs.) (without
commutation)
Annuity Option Selected (The option can be changed any time before vesting)
~

surrender value payable
89 [Page
Notes:

The values shown above are for illustration purpose only. The actual annuity amount receivable depends on the prevailing annuity rates at
the time of vesting.
Annualized Premium excludes underwriting extra premium, frequency loadings on premiums, the premiums paid towards the riders, if any
and Goods & Service Tax.
Refer the sales literature for explanation of terms used in this illustration.
1 ......................... (name), have explained the premiums and
benefits under the product fully to the prospect/policyholder.
1 ........................ (name), having received the information with respect to
Place:
Date:
the above, have understood the above statement before entering into
the contract
Signature of Agent/Intermediary/Official of the insurer I D ate: Signature of prospect/ Policyholder

~

90 I P age
Name of the Primary Annuitant:
Age:
Name of Secondary Annuitant (In case of Joint Life Annuity):
Age:
Annuity (Defen-ed/Immediate)
Purchase Price:

I Annexure 8: BI for Non - Linked Non par Products - Annuity
Proposal No:
Name of the Product:
Tag line:
Unique Identification No.
GST Rate:
This benefit illustration is intended to show year - wise premiums payable and benefits under the Policy
Policy Details
Annuity option Specified Period for which Percentages of annuity to Frequency of Annuity Amount Benefits
(1) Annuity IS Ce11ain (if Secondary Annuitant 011 Annuity Payment Guaranteed Annuity Payout Initial Variable Payable 011
Applicable) death of the Primary (4) Rs. Annuity Payout Death Rs.
(2) Annuitant (if Applicable) (5) (if applicable) (7)
(3) Rs.
(6)
Premium/Purchase Price Summary
Base Plan Riders Total instalment
Premium
Instalment Premium without GST
Instalment Premium with first year GST
Instalment Premium with GST 2 nd year onwards
How to read and understand this benefit illustration?
(1) This benefit illustration is intended to show the guaranteed annuity pay-out and variability of annuity pay-outs (in case of variable annuity pay-out option) with the
movement of publicly available benchmark for the lifetime of annuitant(s).
(2) The values shown are for illustration purpose only. The actual annuity amount under variable annuity pay-out may go up or down depending on the volatility and
risks associated with the publicly available benchmark.
~ 911Page

(3) For more details on risk factors, terms and conditions please read sales brochure carefully. Annualized premium excludes underwriting extra premium frequency
loading5, if any on premium, the premium paid towards tile riders, If any, and Goods & Services Tax. Please refer the sales literature for explanation of terms used
in this illustration.
(In case of variable annuity pay-out option, investment risk is partially borne by the policyholder 0~1rnuitants)
Projection of Annuity pay-out
Details of the publicly available benchmark used for variable annuity payout, if applicable:
Guaranteed Annuity Variable Annuity Projected Surrender Benefits, if any Total Benefits Including Guaranteed
Payout Payout (if applicable) value of the and Variable Benefits
Single/ benchmark
Policy Annualized
Year premium Guaranteed Special Surrender
Surrender Surrender Value Annuity Payout Death Benefit
Value Value (3+4)

(^1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10)
Note: The benchmark shown in the column (5) is based on the projection made by the insurer based on expected movement (both positive and negative) of
the benchmark.
I. .................... .... (name), have explained the premiums payable,
benefits receivable and the Terms & Conditions under the product fully
to the prospect/policyholder.
Place:
Date:
Signature of Agent/Intermediary/Official of the Insurer
I.. ...................... (name), having received the information with
respect to the above, have understood the above statement before
entering into the contract.
Date: Signature of prospect/ Policyholder
~
921Page

Annexure 9 - Illustration for calculation of RIV for Linked Insurance Product
Year Month Age Premium Premium Fund Death Mortality Service Rider Admin Fund FMC Fund Gross yield:
allocation At Benefit charge, Tax charges Charge Before At 8%
Charge start Morbidity FMC end Net yield: .......
Charge
Assum~tions 1 1 35 RIV
Age - 35 years 1 2 35 Year
Term - 15 years 1 3 35 1
PPT -15 years 1 4 35 2
Sex - Male 1 5 35 3
premium -...... Rs. 1 6 35 4
Sum insured - ....... 1 7 35 5
Rs. (^1 8 35 6)
1 9 35 7
Mortality Charges- 1 10 35 8
Morbidity charges-^1 11 35 9
1 12 36 10
Service Tax -^2 13 36 11
Fund growth rate -^2 14 36 12
FMC-p.a^2 1S^36 13
Adm in charges -^2 16 36 14
(^2 17 36 15)
Premium allocation^2 18 36
charge^2 19 36
Year 1-... ... %
Year 2 - ..... %
Thereafter -....... %^15 180 49
Note:- The above calculation sheet is for illustrative purpose and exhibits the application of principles stated in the circular. This is NOT a point or sale
document
~
93 IP age

SCHEDULE-C
Matters to be stated in Insurance policies
(refer clause 14.2)
Matters to be stated in Life Insurance policies
1.1 A life insurance policy shall clearly state:
i. the name and UIN, its terms and conditions;
ii. name, code number, contact details of the person involved in sales process;
iii. whether it is participating in profits or not, whether it is linked or non-linked;
iv. funds/ index offered, charges, switching of funds etc., in case of linked;
v. the manner of vesting or payment of profits such as cash bonus, deferred bonus, simple or compound
reversionary bonus;
vi. the benefits payable and the contingencies upon which these are payable and the other terms and
conditions of the insurance contract;
vii. the name of Nominee (s), age of nominee(s) and their relationship and name of guardian in case of
minor nominees;
viii. the details of the riders being attached to the main policy;
ix. the date of commencement of risk, the date of maturity and the date(s) on which survival benefits, if
any, are payable;
x. the premiums payable, periodicity of payment, grace period allowed for payment of the premium, the
date of last instalment of premium, the implication of discontinuing the payment of an instalment(s) of
premium and also the provisions of guaranteed surrender value;
xi. the details of revival schemes provided for reviving a lapsed policy and requirements to be submitted
for revival there under.
xii. Name, Address, Date of birth and age of the insured as at the date of commencement of the policy.
xiii. the policy conditions for
a) conversion of the policy into paid up policy,
b) surrender,
c) foreclosure,
d) non-forfeiture,
941 Pao-::, e
e) discontinuance provisions in case of Linked Policies,
f) the provisions of guaranteed surrender value;
xiv. reference no. of Customer Information Sheet;
xv. contingencies excluded from the scope of the cover, both in respect of the main policy and the riders;
xvi. the provisions for nomination, assignment, loans on security of the policy and a statement that the rate
of interest payable on such loan shall be as prescribed by the insurer at the time of taking the loan;
xvii. any special clauses, exclusions or conditions imposed on the policy;
xviii. the address, email id of the insurer to which all communications in respect of the policy shall be sent;
xix. the notes to policyholder highlighting the significance of notifying timely the change of his/her address;
xx. details of insurer's Internal Grievance Redressal Mechanism along with address and contact details of
Insurance Ombudsman within whose territorial jurisdiction the branch or office of the insurer or the
residential address or place of residence of the policyholder is located;
xxi. Procedure to register a claim/grievance;
xxii. the list of documents that are required to be submitted by a claimant in case of a claim under the policy.
Matters to be Stated in General Insurance Policy
2.1 A general insurance policy shall clearly state:
i. the name(s) and address(s) of the insured and of any bank/ financial institution (s) or any other person
having financial interest in the subject matter of insurance,
ii. UIN of the product, name, code number,
iii. contact details of the person involved in sales process,
iv. full description of the property or interest insured,
v. the location or locations of the property or interest insured under the policy and, where appropriate,
with respective insured values,
vi. period of Insurance,
vii. sums insured,
viii. perils covered and not covered,
ix. any franchise or deductible applicable,
x. any special conditions attaching to the policy,
95 j P a g e
xi. premium payable and where the premium is provisional subject to adjustment, the basis of adjustment
of premium be stated,
xii. Reference of Customer Information Sheet (CIS),
xiii. policy terms, conditions and warranties, Exclusions, if any,
xiv. action to be taken by the insured upon occurrence of a contingency likely to give rise to a claim under
the policy,
xv. the obligations of the insured in relation to the subject matter of insurance upon occurrence of an event
giving rise to a claim and the rights of the insurer in the circumstances,
xvi. any special conditions attaching to the policy,
xvii. the grounds for cancellation of the policy which in the case of a retail policy, for the insurer, can be only
on the grounds of mis-representation, non-disclosure of material facts, fraud or non-co-operation of the
insured,
xviii. the address of the insurer to which all communications in respect of the insurance contract should be
sent,
xix. the details of the endorsements, add-on covers attaching to the main policy,
xx. that, on renewal, the benefits provided under the policy and/or terms and conditions of the policy
including premium rate may be subject to change,
xxi. Action to be taken on the occurrence of a claim and the list of the documents that needs to be attached
for filing of claim;
xxii. details of insurer's internal grievance redressal mechanism along with address and contact details of
Insurance Ombudsman within whose territorial jurisdiction the branch or office of the insurer or the
residential address or place of residence of the policyholder is located,
xxiii. Procedure to register a claim/grievance,
xxiv. the list of documents that are required to be submitted by a claimant in case of a claim under the policy.
Matters to be Stated in a Health Insurance Policy
3.1 A health insurance policy shall clearly state:
i. The name of the policyholder and the names of each beneficiary covered,
ii. Product Name, UIN of the product, code number,
j1/^961 Page
iii. contact details of the person involved in sales process,
iv. Date of birth of the insured and corresponding age in completed years,
v. The address of the insured,
vi. The sums Insured,
vii. The period of insurance and the date from which the policyholder has been continuously obtaining
health insurance cover from any of the insurers without break,
viii. Reference of Customer Information Sheet (CIS),
ix. The sub-limits, Proportionate Deductions and the existence of Package rates if any, with cross reference
to the concerned policy section,
x. Co-pay limits if any,
xi. The pre-existing disease (PED) waiting period, if applicable,
xii. Specific waiting periods as applicable,
xiii. Deductible as applicable - general and specific, if any,
xiv. Cumulative Bonus, if any,
xv. Periodicity of payment of premium instalment,
xvi. Policy period,
xvii. Grace Period and its implication on insurance coverage,
xviii. Policy terms, conditions, exclusions, warranties,

xix. Action to be taken on the occurrence of a claim for cashless and reimbursement options separately,
xx. Procedure for claims submission, timelines and possible course of action, if timelines for claim
submission are not adhered to along with all the claims documents required for claim processing,
xxi. the list of documents that are required to be submitted by a claimant in case of a claim under the policy,
xxii. Details of TPA, if any engaged and their address, toll free number, website details,
xxiii. Details of Grievance Redressal mechanism of insurer,

xxiv. Free look period facility and portability conditions,
xxv. Policy migration facility and conditions wherever applicable,
97 j Page
xxvi. that, on renewal, the policy could be subject to certain changes in terms and conditions including
change in premium rate,
xxvii. Provision for cancellation of the policy,
xxviii. Procedure to register a claim/grievance,
xxix. Address and other contact details of Ombudsman within whose territorial jurisdiction the branch or
office of the insurer or the residential address or place of residence of the policyholder is located.
Mandatory Minimum Disclosures for Combi-Life Products
i. The product is jointly offered by "abc insurance company" (specify general/stand-alone health insurer
name) and "xyz insurance company" (specify life insurer name),
ii. The risks of this 'Cambi Product' are distinct and are assumed / accepted by respective insurance
companies,
iii. The liability to settle the claim vests with respective insurers, i.e., for health insurance benefits "abc
insurance company" (specify general/stand-alone health insurer name) and for life insurance benefits
"xyz insurance company" (specify life insurer name),
iv. The policyholders of the 'Cambi Product' under reference are eligible to continue with either part of the
policy, discontinuing the other during the policy term,
v. Where guaranteed renewability of health insurance plan is allowed, the health insurance portion of this
'Cambi Product' is entitled to that facility,
vi. Specific disclosures on the available premium payment options on these 'Cambi Products',
vii. Specific disclosures about the available policy servicing facilities including claims servicing, for these
'Com bi Products',
viii. Specific disclosures on the availability of services of 'Third Party Administrators (TPAs)' for health
insurance portion of risk, if available,
ix. Specific disclosures on the available Grievances Redressal Options including particulars of Ombudsman
under these 'Cambi products',
x. Policyholders are to be advised to familiarize themselves with the policy benefits and policy service
structure of the 'Com bi Product' before deciding to purchase the policy,
xi. Policy documents of 'Cambi Products' shall contain the above referred points (iii) to (xi) as minimum
disclosures,
xii. the list of documents that are required to be submitted by a claimant in case of a claim under the policy,
~ 981 Pag e

xiii. Declaration from the prospect shall be obtained and attached to proposal form t hat he/she has
understood the disclosures mentioned above.
In case of pilot products, in addition to all the extant disclosure norms applicable to insurance advertisements,
all the sales and publicity material pertaining to the 'pilot products' shall disclose the followi ng:
i. The product offered is a pilot product and that it is a close-ended one,
ii. The product may be discontinued from the date of dd/mm/yyyy (to specify the maximum date on which the
product be either withdrawn or converted into a regular product) or may be continued as a regular product,
iii. In the event of the discontim.Jation of the pilot product, the Insured would be provided the option of migration
as per the extant applicable provisions,
iv. The product shall carry a tag line of "PILOT PRODUCT" to demonstrate that the health insurance product
promoted is a pilot product.
99 I Page

SCHEDULE-D
(Refer clause 16.1)
CUSTOMER INFORMATION SHEET/KNOW YOUR POLICY-HEALTH
This document provides key information about your policy. You are also advised to go through your policy
document.
SI Title Description Policy
Clause
Number

No
1
2

3

4

5
(Please refer to applicable Policy Clause Number in
next column)
Name of Insurance XXXXXX
Product/Policy
Policy number
Type of Insurance
Product/ Policy
Sum Insured (Basis)
(Along with amount)
Policy Coverage (What
the policy covers?)
(Policy Clause
Number/s)
Indemnity (Where insured losses are covered up
to the Sum Insured under the policy)
Benefit (Where an Insurance Policy pays a fixed
amount under the policy on the occurrence of a
covered event)
Both Indemnity and Benefit (where policy has
elements of both the above)
Individual Sum Insured -Where each member has
a separate sum insured under the policy), or
Floater Sum Insured-Where all members under
the policy have a single sum insured limit which
may be utilized by any or all members
Expenses in respect of:
Admission in Hospital beyond xx hours
Pre-hospitalisation (treatment prior to admission in
hospital) of xx days amounting to x% of claim
Post-hospitalisation (treatment after discharge from
hospital) within xx days from date of discharge amounting
to x% of claim.
100 IP age
SI Title
No

6 Exclusions

Description
(Please refer to applicable Policy Clause Number in
next column)
Specified/ Listed procedures requiring less than xx hours
of hospitalization (day care)
Undergoing specified procedure in case of xx Critical
illnesses
Diagnosis of an illness of specified severity
Daily cash benefit of Rs. _per day during
admission in hospital
OPD /Dental/Maternity coverage
Emergency or Travel Medical Assistance
Personal Accident Cover
Travel Cover
(Note: This is an indicative list. Insurer must ensure that
all the benefits of the policy are listed above)
(Note: Insurer has to ensure that all the applicable
(what the policy does not exclusions are listed here)
cover)
7 !Waiting period

ITime period during
which specified
diseases/treatments
are not covered
It is counted from the
beginning of the policy
coverage.
Initial waiting Period: xx days for all illnesses (not
applicable in case of continuous renewal or accidents)
Specific Waiting periods (Not applicable for claims arising
due to an accident):
o xx months for xx diseases/procedures
o yy months for yy diseases/procedures
Pre-existing diseases: Covered after xx months
Policy
Clause
Number
lOljPage
SI
No

8

Title
Financial limits of
coverage
i. Sub-limit (It is a pre-
defined limit and the
insurance company
Description
(Please refer to applicable Policy Clause Number in
next column)
The policy will pay only up to the limits specified
hereunder for the following diseases/procedures:
xx xx

will not pay any In case of a claim, this policy requires you to share the
amount in excess of following costs: Expenses exceeding the following Sub-
this limit)
ii. Co-payment (It is a
specified
amount/percentage
of the admissible
iii.
claim amount to be
paid by
policyholder/insured
).
Deductible (It is a
specified amount:
up to which an
insurance
company will not
pay any claim, and
which will be
deducted from
total claim amount
(if claim amount is
more than the
specified amount)
limits
■ Room / ICU charges beyond ------------
■ For the following specified diseases:
■
■
xxxx

Deductible of Rs. XXX per claim / per year/ both
Policy
Clause
Number
102 J Page
SI Title
No

iv. Any other limit (as
applicable)
Description
(Please refer to applicable Policy Clause Number in
next column)
9 Claims/Claims Procedure Details of procedure to be followed for cashless service
as well as for reimbursement of claim including pre and
post hospitalization.

10 Policy Servicing
11 Grievances/Complaints
Turn Around Time (TAT) for claims settlement:
i. TAT for preauthorization of cashless facility XXX
ii. TAT for cashless final bill authorization: XXX
Provide the details /web link for following:
i. Network Hospital details
ii. Helpline number
iii. Hospitals which are blacklisted or from where no
claims will be accepted by insurer
iv. Downloading/getting claim form
Call center number of the insurer
Details of Company officials
Details of
Grievance Redressal Officer of the insurer
Insurance
Department
Ombudsman
(Please provide
company grievance
contact details,
free number and email)
portal/
Toll
Policy
Clause
Number
103 I P age
SI Title
No

12 Things to
remember

Description
(Please refer to applicable Policy Clause Number in
next column)
Free Look cancellation: You may cancel the insurance
policy if you do not want it, within xx days from the
beginning of the policy.
Insurer to specify the process for free look cancellation
Policy renewal: Except on grounds of fraud, moral
hazard or misrepresentation or non-cooperation, renewal
of your policy shall not be denied, provided the policy is
not withdrawn.
Migration and Portability: When your policy is due for
renewal, you may migrate to another policy with us or port
your policy to another insurer.
Insurer to specify the process for migration and portability
Change in Sum Insured: Sum Insured can be changed
(increased/decreased) only at the time of renewal or at
any time, subject to underwriting by the company. For
increase in SI, the waiting period if any shall start afresh
only for the enhanced portion of the sum insured
Moratorium Period: After completion of Five
continuous years under the policy no look back to be
applied. This period of Five years is called as
moratorium period. The moratorium would be applicable
for the sums insured of the first policy and subsequently
completion of Five continuous years would be
applicable from date of enhancement of sums insured
only on the enhanced limits.
After the expiry of Moratorium Period no health insurance
Policy
Clause
Number
1041 Page
SI Title Description Policy
No Clause
(Please refer to applicable Policy Clause Number in Number
next column)
policy shall be contestable except for proven fraud and
permanent exclusions specified in the policy contract.
13 Your Obligations Please disclose all pre-existing disease/s or condition/s
before buying a policy. Non-disclosure may affect the
claim settlement.
Disclosure of other material information during the policy
period.)
Insurer to specify the material information
Declaration by the Policyholder;
I have read the above and confirm having noted the details.
Place:
Date:
Note:

i.
ii.
iii.
(Signature of the Policyholder)
Insurer shall provide web-link where the product related documents including the Customer
Information sheet are available on the website of the Insurer.
In case of any conflict, the terms and conditions mentioned in the policy document shall prevail.
Insurer to take confirmation of the Policyholder regarding receiving of the Customer
Information Sheet.
105 I Page

CUSTOMER INFORMATION SHEET-GENERAL INSURANCE
This document provides only key information about your policy. Please refer to the policy document for detailed ten
and conditions.

SI Title Description Poli,cy /
No (Please refer to applicable Policy Clause Number Clause
in next column) Number
1 Product Name
2 Unique Identification
Number (UIN) allotted
by IRDAI
3 Structure • State basis of Sum / Limit Insured
. Indemnity/ Modified Indemnity
. Fixed Benefit
. Parametric Limit
4 Interests Insured • List broad categories
5 Sum Insured / Motor List the main Sums/ Limits insured per Coverage/
Insured Declared Coverage Section
Value Scope
6 Policy Coverage • List and describe each insured Coverage:

7 Add-on Cover • List and describe with Sum/Limit Insured, each
Add-on Cover opted by the Policyholder
8 Loss Participation State and explain how Deductible is applied.
(List separate Deductibles per Coverage)
9 Exclusions List all the applicable exclusions
10. Special Conditions and State and specify context
Warranties (if any) Explain obligations of the Policyholder.
Admissibility of Claim • Mention the broad principle of admissibility / denial
of claims
[Example: Reporting of loss occurrence; Duty of
care & loss minimization; Exclusion of Willful
Negligence]
Include a sample claim calculation process for retail
products
106 I P age
SI Title Description
No (Please refer to applicable Policy Clause Number
in next column)
Policy Servicing - • Toll free/ IVRS number of the Insurer
Claim Intimation and • Website / Email
Processing • Details of designated company officials to be
contacted in time of claim
Details of procedure to be followed for cashless
service (In case of Motor Insurance) as well as
for reimbursement of claim
Turn Around Time (TAT) for claims settlement
Escalation Matrix when TAT is not satisfied
Grievance Redressal • State the brief details of Protection of
and Policyholders Policyholder's Interest
Protection • Details of Grievance Redressal Officer of the
Insurer
Bima Bharosa Portal
Ombudsman
(Please provide contact details, Toll free number and
email)
Obligations of the • To disclose all information correctly sought by the
Policyholder insurer at time of filling the proposal form
In case of any change/ modification I addition to
the already declared information the same shall be
brought to the notice of the Insurer immediately
Non-disclosure of material information may affect
the claim settlement.
Disclosure of other material information during the
policy period.
(Insurer to specify the material information)
Declaration by the Policyholder;
I have read the above and confirm having noted the details.
Place:
Polic y I
Clause
Number
Date: -------------------'---'"'--------=------''---------(Signature of the Policyholder)

i. Insurer shall provide web-link where the product related documents including the Customer
Information sheet are available on the website of the Insurer.
ii. In case of any conflict, the terms and conditions mentioned in the policy document shall prevail.
iii. Insurer to take confirmation of the Policyholder regarding receiving of the Customer Information
Sheet. ~

~
l 07 [ Page
LIFE INSURANCE
CUSTOMER INFORMATION SHEET/ KNOW YOUR POLICY
This document provides key information about your policy. You are also advised to go through your policy
document.
SI. no. Title Description in Simple Words
(Please refer to applicable Policy Clause Number in next col umn)

Name of the Insurance
Product and Unique
Identification Number
(UIN)
Policy Number
Type of Insurance Policy • Pure Risk
Linked
Non-Linked other than pure risk and pension
Immediate Annuity
Deferred Annuity
Linked Pension
Non-Linked Pension.
Basic Policy details • Instalment Premium
Mode of premium payment (e.g. Monthly, Quarterly, half
yearly or Yearly)
Sum Assured on death
Sum Assured on Maturity
Premium payment Term
Policy Term
Policy • Benefits payable on maturity
Coverage/benefits • Benefits payable on death
payable • Survival Benefits excluding that payable on maturity
Surrender benefits
Options to policyholders for availing benefits, if any,
covered under the policy.
Other benefits/options payable, specific to the policy, if
any.
Lock-in period for Linked Insurance products
Options available (in • Partial Withdrawal
case of Linked Insurance • Top -up Provision
Products) • Switches
Settlement option
Any other option.
Option available(in case • Type of immediate annuity, for example Life annuity with
of Annuity product) Return of Purchase price etc.
- Proportion of annuity amount guaranteed for variable pay-
out option.
Any other option.
108 I P age
Policy
Clause
Number
SI. no. Title Description in Simple Words Policy
(Please refer to applicable Policy Clause Number in next col umn) Clause
Number

Riders opted, if any Summary of coverage
Exclusions (events Brief list of the applicable exclusions, if any
where insurance
coverage is not payable),
if any.
Waiting /lien Period, if Number of Days
any
Grace period Number of Days
Free Look Period Number of days
Lapse, paid-up and Brief description
revival of the Policy
Policy Loan, if Brief description
applicable
Claims/Claims • Turn Around Time (TAT) for claims settlement and brief
Procedure procedure
Helpline/Call Centre number
Contact details of the insurer
Link for downloading claim form and list of documents
required including bank account details.
Policy Servicing • Turn Around Time (TAT)
Helpline/Call Centre number
Contact details of the insurer
Link for downloading applicable forms and list of documents
required including bank account details.
Grievances /Complaints • Contact details of Grievance Redressal Officer of the insurer
Link for registering the grievance with the insurer's portal
Contact details of Ombudsman
Declaration by the Policyholder
I have read the above and confirm having noted the details.
Place: (Signature of the Policyholder)
Date:
Note:
Insurer shall provide web-link where the product related documents including the Customer
Information sheet are available on the website of the insurer.
In case of any conflict, the terms and conditions mentioned in the policy document shall prevail.
m. Insurer to take confirmation of the policyholder regarding receiving of the Customer
Information Sheet.
109 JP age